'China has unveiled a prototype of its next-generation high-speed train, the CR450, which will become the world's fastest. China's Ministry of Transport said that the CR450 has achieved a test speed of 450km/h and an operational speed of 400km/h. The country already boasts some of the world's fastest commercial high-speed trains. The Shanghai maglev, which connects Shanghai's Pudong International Airport with downtown Shanghai, has a top speed of 430kmh, making it the world's fastest commercial train service.'
'Japan has successfully launched the world's first wooden satellite, LignoSat, into space. The groundbreaking project is a joint effort of Kyoto University and Sumitomo Forestry. The main goal of this mission is to evaluate the feasibility of using timber in future lunar and Mars explorations. LignoSat will be taken to the International Space Station (ISS) on a SpaceX mission and released into orbit some 400km above Earth.'
'Elon Musk's favorite cryptocurrency, Dogecoin, surged a whopping 25% to $0.2068 earlier today. The surge can largely be attributed to Donald Trump's win in the US presidential race. Trump has now secured a historic victory, leading with 277 electoral votes to surpass the 270 threshold. Both Musk's vocal support and Trump's pro-cryptocurrency stance have fueled the rally.'
'Dubai International Airport, recognized as the world's busiest hub for international travel, is set to relocate its operations to a new $35 billion facility within the next 10 years. The announcement was made by Dubai's ruler, Sheikh Mohammed bin Rashid Al Maktoum. With room for 260 million passengers, Al Maktoum International Airport will be the world's biggest airport. It will be five times the size of Dubai International Airport.'
'JSW Group and MG Motor will launch their first car, a crossover utility vehicle (CUV) named the Cloud EV, this Diwali. It should be priced under ₹20 lakh. The Indian joint venture will launch five new energy vehicles by 2025. Rajeev Chaba, CEO Emeritus of the company, stated, "The JV has approved 5 new vehicles. Two premium cars and three mass market cars. They will all be new energy vehicles including electric, mild hybrids and strong plug-in hybrid vehicles."'
'NASA's James Webb Space Telescope (JWST) has made another groundbreaking discovery by spotting the earliest galaxy ever seen.
The galaxy, dubbed MoM-z14, existed just 280 million years after the Big Bang.
"Meet our current record holder for farthest galaxy ever seen (so far!!) MoM-z14 may look like a little yellow smudge here, but it's our first view of a galaxy that existed just 280 million years after the big bang!" NASA Webb Telescope wrote in a post on X.'
'Ilya Lichtenstein, the notorious hacker behind a multi-billion dollar cryptocurrency heist in 2016, is seeking redemption.
After serving time for stealing 120,000 Bitcoins from Bitfinex exchange, Lichtenstein has publicly acknowledged his past mistakes and expressed a desire to work in cybersecurity.
He recently took to LinkedIn to share his journey of transformation and the lessons learned during his time in prison.'
'Astronomers are puzzled by the disappearance of a yellow supergiant star, M31-2014-DS1, in the Andromeda galaxy.
The star was last seen shining brightly between 2014 and 2018.
Its sudden disappearance has left scientists scratching their heads, as there were no signs of a supernova explosion that usually marks such stellar events.
Two research teams have since proposed possible explanations for this cosmic mystery.
One of the research teams, using data from the James Webb Space Telescope (JWST), has suggested that M31-2014-DS1 might have collapsed into a black hole without exploding as a supernova.
They proposed this scenario in their preprint paper, yet to be peer-reviewed.
The researchers noted that "stellar-mass black holes (BHs) are understood to represent the end states of massive stellar evolution."'
'A South Korean court has sentenced former First Lady Kim Keon Hee to 20 months in prison for corruption.
The Seoul Central District Court found her guilty of accepting bribes from Unification Church officials in exchange for political favors.
However, the court cleared her of charges related to stock price manipulation and violating political funding laws.
The court's ruling can be appealed by either Kim or the prosecutors.
Prosecutors had sought a 15-year sentence and fines of 2.9 billion won (approximately $2 million).
They accused Kim of accepting luxury items such as Chanel bags and a diamond necklace from South Korea's Unification Church in return for political favors.'
'Colombian authorities confirmed that no survivors have been found after a plane crashed on Wednesday.
The small commercial plane of the state-owned airline Satena disappeared from radar while it was on its way to northeastern Colombia.
The Beechcraft 1900D, registered as HK-4709, was carrying 13 passengers and two crew members when it lost contact with air traffic control minutes before its scheduled landing in Ocana.
All 15 have been confirmed dead.'
