The record for the most Oscar nominations is 14, a total accrued by only three movies: “La La Land” (2016), “Titanic” (1997) and “All About Eve” (1950).

Could this be the year that 75-year-old record finally falls?

I’m inclined to think so. In fact, two of this year’s top contenders — “Sinners” and “One Battle After Another” — have a real shot at cracking that ceiling when the nominations are announced on Thursday. It helps that the Oscars just introduced a casting category that will pad nomination totals from here on out, but both contenders should prove huge in their own right, with “Sinners” particularly well-positioned not just to break that record but also to blow past it if the movie overperforms.

In the meantime, here are my projected nominees in the top six Oscar categories with my predictions in bold. Industry buzz factors into these picks, as do the nominations and wins bestowed by key precursors like the Golden Globes, Screen Actors Guild, Producers Guild of America and Directors Guild of America. And when even those weren’t enough, I went with my gut.

Best Picture
Five films this season scored top nominations from the producers, directors and actors guilds: “One Battle After Another,” “Sinners,” “Hamnet,” “Marty Supreme” and “Frankenstein.” So that’s half of our best-picture list sorted.

Though the Norwegian drama “Sentimental Value” raised red flags after missing out on any Screen Actors Guild nominations, the academy is far more inclined to reward international films and the supporting actor Stellan Skarsgard helpfully won the Golden Globe the day before Oscar voting began. Brazil’s “The Secret Agent” also nabbed two Globes at exactly the right time, and though the Iranian movie “It Was Just An Accident” hasn’t made much noise since its Gotham wins in early December, that Palme d’Or from Cannes should keep it in contention.

As other Netflix contenders like “Jay Kelly” and “A House of Dynamite” lost momentum, the streamer’s elegiac period piece “Train Dreams” kept on chugging with top-ten citations from the producers guild and American Film Institute. And though “Bugonia” wasn’t received as rapturously as “Poor Things,” another recent collaboration between Emma Stone and the director Yorgos Lanthimos, SAG nominations for Stone and her co-star, Jesse Plemons, suggest the movie is still alive and kicking.

Best Director
I’m taking a conservative approach to this category and predicting a perfect match with the five auteurs already nominated by the directors guild: Paul Thomas Anderson (“One Battle After Another”), Ryan Coogler (“Sinners”), Guillermo del Toro (“Frankenstein”), Josh Safdie (“Marty Supreme”) and Chloé Zhao (“Hamnet”).

Joachim Trier (“Sentimental Value”) managed a BAFTA longlist citation that del Toro didn’t get, but Oscar voters adore del Toro, a former winner in this category for “The Shape of Water” (2018). The dissident filmmaker Jafar Panahi (“It Was Just an Accident”) has an incredibly compelling personal story — after shooting the film in secret, he was sentenced in absentia by Iran to a year in prison — but will that be enough?

Editors’ Picks

A.I. Has Arrived in Gmail. Here’s What to Know.

The Lie That Elite Colleges, and a Nation, Wanted to Believe

7 Smart Cooking Tips for the Best Chicken Soup of Your Life
Though the directors’ branch of the academy likes to throw curveballs, I expect a straight-down-the-middle outcome this time.

As Jack O’Connell was finishing up his work playing the jig-dancing vampire Remmick in “Sinners,” he had to turn his attention to another character with a seemingly insatiable bloodlust. In a matter of weeks he would have to become Sir Lord Jimmy Crystal, a violent cult leader in a postapocalyptic Britain decimated by the rage virus first depicted in Danny Boyle’s 2002 classic, “28 Days Later.”

Jimmy, who wears a purple tracksuit and a tiara, briefly makes his first appearance at the end of Boyle’s follow-up, “28 Years Later,” but comes to full horrifying fruition in the new “28 Years Later: The Bone Temple,” directed by Nia DaCosta. Between Remmick and Jimmy, the 35-year-old O’Connell is establishing himself as one of the most terrifying presences in current cinema.

What the characters share is that “they’re not conscious of it being wrong or bad to them, it’s their norm,” he said in the low light of a downtown Manhattan bar, adding that once you settle into that mentality, it’s “a little boundless.” Despite the similarities, playing two villains back to back was a chance to show his range.

“To me, it was important to use it as an opportunity to demonstrate distinction,” he said.
O’Connell has been working professionally since he was a teenager, but his turn as Remmick, who gleefully breaks up the juke joint party in the director Ryan Coogler’s hit, has elevated his profile in Hollywood. He calls London home and when we spoke in early January, it was the first time he had been back to the United States since “Sinners” was released in April and became the highest-grossing live-action original film since “Inception” in 2010.

“People are approaching me today about it,” he said. “It’s so flattering. So rewarding.”

While Remmick is a bloodsucker, Jimmy Crystal might be even more brutal. He’s less interested in killing the infected rampagers than in mutilating humans as ritualistic sacrifice. Still, Alex Garland’s screenplay makes it clear where Jimmy’s perversions originated. As a child he watched his family being annihilated while his father, a vicar, welcomed the undead horde as evidence of God’s judgment.

Now an adult, Jimmy clings to childhood fantasy and has fashioned his look partly after the Teletubbies and partly after the popular television presenter Jimmy Savile. After Savile’s death in 2011, his decades of sexual abuse, often of children, came to light. In the universe created by Boyle and Garland, Jimmy wouldn’t know about Savile’s crimes. The world effectively ended in the early 2000s.

Editors’ Picks

A.I. Has Arrived in Gmail. Here’s What to Know.

The Lie That Elite Colleges, and a Nation, Wanted to Believe

An A.I. Start-Up Says It Wants to Empower Workers, Not Replace Them
Founded by researchers from Anthropic, Google and xAI, the new company, Humans&, is already valued at $4.48 billion.

As a research scientist at Anthropic, one of the world’s leading A.I. companies, Andi Peng was part of a team that tried to make sure the company’s technology didn’t tell lies or damage the mental health of the people who used it.

But she came to realize that there was a much larger problem: Like many other A.I. companies, Anthropic was trying to build technology that would systematically replace people in the work force.

Ms. Peng recently left Anthropic to help start a company with four other prominent technologists, including two researchers from Elon Musk’s xAI and one of the first employees at Google.

The new company, Humans&, has embraced the notion that A.I. should empower people rather than replace them. The founders said their goal was to build software that facilitated collaboration between people — like an A.I. version of an instant messaging app — while also helping with internet searches and other tasks that suit machines.

“Anthropic is training its model to work autonomously. It loved to highlight how its models churned for eight hours, 24 hours, 50 hours by itself to complete a task,” Ms. Peng said. “That was never my motivation. I think of machines and humans as complementary.”

Executives at other tech companies may chafe at the criticism that they are building systems meant to replace human workers. But a number of big thinkers in Silicon Valley believe that A.I. will replace millions of workers in the coming years. Others argue that the new technology will create jobs that haven’t been imagined yet.

Either way, the arrival of Humans& is a clear sign that the money being poured into A.I. start-ups shows little signs of slowing, even as many financial analysts and industry insiders warn of an A.I. bubble.

The San Francisco start-up has raised $480 million in seed funding from tech giants like Nvidia; Jeff Bezos, the founder of Amazon; and venture capital firms like SV Angel and Google Ventures. It is valued at $4.48 billion, even though it has only about 20 employees and launched just three months ago.

“A lot of our investors are human, and they care where humanity is going,” said another founder, Georges Harik, who helped build Google’s first advertising systems as the seventh employee at the search giant.

Editors’ Picks

A.I. Has Arrived in Gmail. Here’s What to Know.

The Lie That Elite Colleges, and a Nation, Wanted to Believe

7 Smart Cooking Tips for the Best Chicken Soup of Your Life
Other start-ups have also raised vast amounts of money in recent months. In the fall, a group of former OpenAI, Meta and Google researchers raised $300 million for an A.I. start-up dedicated to scientific discovery. Mr. Bezos himself raised $6.2 billion for a similar effort where he serves as co-chief executive.

After leaving xAI in September, Eric Zelikman, the chief executive of Humans&, assembled its founders, who also include a Stanford professor, Noah Goodman, and another former xAI researcher, Yuchen He.

The new company is part of a wider effort to build systems that complement rather than replace humans. In 2019, Stanford created a research lab that it calls the Institute for Human-Centered Artificial Intelligence. In the years since, the term “human-centric” has become a clarion call among researchers and entrepreneurs.

“There are some pretty clear principles that designers are beginning to take that favor human-centered approaches,” said Ben Shneiderman, a computer science professor at the University of Maryland who runs an online community dedicated to the approach. “It goes back to the fundamental principle of ensuring human control.”

Mr. Zelikman said that while chatbots were designed to answer questions, they were not good at asking them. The technology, he explained, does not make a big enough effort to understand what people want.

“A.I. has enormous potential to allow people to do more together,” said Mr. Zelikman, who was among the first employees at xAI, where he helped develop the Grok chatbot. “The current paradigm — questioning and answering — is not going to get us there.”

After hiring about 20 researchers and engineers, Humans& aims to use existing A.I. techniques to train A.I. in new ways. That’s expensive, and is a main reason that the company has already raised hundreds of millions of dollars.

The A.I. systems that drive chatbots are called neural networks. By pinpointing patterns in enormous amounts of text culled from across the internet, these systems learn to mimic the way people put words together. They can even learn to write computer programs and solve math problems.

Mr. Zelikman and the others want to train their systems to be more interactive — to request information from the user and store it for later use. Think of it as A.I. with both curiosity and memory. Imagine A.I. that slots seamlessly into a text messaging group with colleagues, friends or family.

“No one really accomplishes anything alone,” Mr. Harik said. “It is mostly teams of people collaborating who build amazing things.”

All Bets Are On: The Rise of Prediction Markets
Billions of dollars are trading hands on sites like Polymarket and Kalshi, where people bet on everything from Taylor Swift’s wedding date to election outcomes.
A surge of antigovernment protests swept Iran this month, leading to civilian casualties and prompting President Trump to hint that he was considering military intervention.

Somehow, it was also a betting opportunity.

On the popular platforms Polymarket and Kalshi, armchair prognosticators wagered millions of dollars on the fate of Iran’s supreme leader, speculating the same way a football fan might bet on the future of a struggling head coach.

Polymarket and Kalshi are prediction markets, sites where people can bet on virtually anything, from the outcome of a sports matchup or an election to the date of Taylor Swift’s wedding.

Once a niche phenomenon, the platforms were first embraced by political junkies who wanted to bet on the presidential election. Now prediction markets are everywhere, an unavoidable presence in American politics and culture.
The same weekend that Mr. Trump mulled intervention in Iran, Polymarket odds were featured in the telecast of the Golden Globe Awards. Major media companies, including CNN, CNBC and The Wall Street Journal, have announced partnerships with prediction markets and integrated the platforms’ data into news reports.

The amount of money flowing onto the platforms has skyrocketed. Nearly $12 billion was traded on Kalshi and Polymarket in December, up more than 400 percent from a year earlier, according to data from Piper Sandler, an investment bank. The companies raised billions from investors last year, making them some of the tech industry’s most promising start-ups. And they share a link to the Trump family: Donald Trump Jr., the president’s oldest son, is an adviser to both firms.
The rise of prediction markets has created new risks and raised fears about the spread of gambling. For decades, sports betting was largely banned in the United States, until the Supreme Court ruled in 2018 that the federal prohibition was unconstitutional.

“Are we just going to have gambling on everything in all 50 states?” asked Dustin Gouker, a gambling industry consultant who writes a newsletter about prediction markets. “That’s the moment we’re at.”

The sites have also been dogged by concerns about market manipulation and insider trading. Hours before the U.S. military captured Venezuela’s president, Nicolás Maduro, an anonymous user on Polymarket bet tens of thousands of dollars that Mr. Maduro would fall, fueling speculation that a government official had placed the bets using confidential information about the military plans.

The trader walked away with a $410,000 payout.
Proponents of prediction markets argue that the platforms are fundamentally different from gambling companies, offering a valuable new source of information by allowing people to bet on world events.

Prediction markets are “the most effective way to aggregate information and the crowd wisdom,” said Tarek Mansour, who co-founded Kalshi in 2018. “People don’t lie when money’s involved. You want to be right about your predictions so you don’t lose money.”

He added that Kalshi operated as a regulated exchange in the United States, with a system for stopping insider trading.

Polymarket has begun offering some betting in the United States, though its main platform still prohibits U.S.-based customers. A company representative did not provide a comment.

Prediction markets operate differently from traditional sports books. The websites offer yes-or-no questions such as “Will the Iranian regime fall before 2027?” or “Supreme Court rules in favor of Trump’s tariffs?”

Customers log onto a website and place bets of any amount by buying what’s known as a contract — the “yes” option on the Iran question, for example. These contracts fluctuate like stocks, with the price moving between $0 and $1.

The price reflects the market’s view on how likely an event is to happen. A price of $0.20 suggests a 20 percent likelihood, while $0.90 suggests a 90 percent likelihood. The payout arrives when an event occurs and the value of the correct contract rises to $1. If a savvy customer bought 100 of those at $0.10 each (a $10 outlay), he or she would collect $100 in winnings.

Unlike sports books, prediction markets do not serve as the “house,” taking the opposite side of a bet. They match the buyers on each side, generating revenue by charging trading fees.

Editors’ Picks

A.I. Has Arrived in Gmail. Here’s What to Know.

The Lie That Elite Colleges, and a Nation, Wanted to Believe

7 Smart Cooking Tips for the Best Chicken Soup of Your Life
The phenomenon gained traction in the 2010s as political betting grew popular. But the businesses did not burst into the mainstream until the 2024 presidential election.

Polymarket, founded in 2020 by the entrepreneur Shayne Coplan, offered odds on the election that showed Donald J. Trump with a larger lead than traditional polling indicated. Mr. Trump trumpeted the projections on Truth Social, his social media platform, sharing a graphic that showed he had a 64 percent chance of victory.
As Polymarket’s profile rose, its legal status was uncertain. The company had been banned in the United States after the Commodity Futures Trading Commission fined it $1.4 million in January 2022 for operating without proper registration. (Some U.S. customers continued to use the site through virtual private networks.) Days after Mr. Trump’s victory in November 2024, federal agents raided Mr. Coplan’s New York City apartment as part of a criminal investigation into whether he was running an unlicensed exchange.

That year, Polymarket was locked in a fierce competition with Kalshi, which was embroiled in a court battle with the Commodity Futures Trading Commission over the legality of betting on congressional elections. Kalshi won the case in late 2024, paving the way for political betting in the United States.

Under Mr. Trump, the regulatory landscape has been transformed. The Justice Department dropped its investigation into Mr. Coplan. Both Polymarket and Kalshi are now available to U.S. customers, with the trading commission’s blessing. Just four months after his home was raided, Mr. Coplan was invited to join a group of executives at the White House for a cryptocurrency summit with Mr. Trump.

But the legal tussling is likely to continue. Several states are battling the prediction markets in federal courts, arguing that the sites should be required to follow rules that apply to traditional gambling companies.

“The states are saying, ‘This is gambling, and you have to follow our licensing and regulation,’” said Andrew Kim, a lawyer at Goodwin who has tracked the litigation. “You don’t have a license — get out of our state.’”

That dispute could eventually reach the Supreme Court. In the meantime, business is booming.

In December, Kalshi said it had raised new financing at an $11 billion valuation. Polymarket is valued at $9 billion after raising funds from Intercontinental Exchange, the owner of the New York Stock Exchange.
The companies are marketing aggressively. Kalshi put up flashy ads in Times Square, displaying election odds. The live telecast of the Globes this month featured Polymarket’s projections for the winner in the best original song and other categories.

“People have more clarity about the world because Polymarket exists,” Mr. Coplan declared in a celebratory post on social media. The platform correctly predicted 26 of the 28 Globe races, he noted.

As interest in prediction markets has exploded, concerns have mounted from legislators and other critics. Among their worries is that someone with nonpublic information — about the date of Ms. Swift’s nuptials, for example — may use the sites to make money, at the expense of less informed buyers who take the other side of the trade.

Mr. Mansour has said Kalshi bans insider trading and supports a bill in Congress that would enshrine that prohibition into law. But some prediction market enthusiasts have argued that insider trading is useful, because it can move the market and lead to more accurate projections.

Another concern is the potential for market manipulation.

In October, people wagered on which words would be uttered during an earnings call for Coinbase, the largest U.S. crypto company. Brian Armstrong, the company’s chief executive, was aware of the betting — and influenced the outcome. At the end of the call, he read several of the words aloud from a list: Bitcoin, Ethereum, blockchain, staking, web3.

“I was a little distracted because I was tracking the prediction market,” he said on the call.

Coinbase brushed off any concerns about impropriety. The call “caused me no heartburn whatsoever,” said Paul Grewal, the company’s chief legal officer.

There was no indication that Mr. Armstrong had profited. Asked later about his role in the betting, he said he hadn’t had any money riding on the outcome.

“The conference call was me just having a little bit of fun,” Mr. Armstrong said.