Skip to contentSkip to site index

Close Read

Face to Face With History’s Most Dangerous Painter
By Jason Farago Jan. 22, 2026
Share full article


697
The story’s main image: an 18th-century self-portrait showing a painter seated in an upholstered wooden chair in front of a light gray wall. He’s looking straight ahead, directly at the viewer, with his body turned to the left of the picture. He has brown hair, which hangs down just past his ears, and dark eyes. His mouth is closed, and he has a scar on his cheek. He is wearing a dark gray coat with pinkish-burgundy trim over a white shirt, and he has a white bow tied around his neck. He holds a single paintbrush in one hand and more brushes and a palette in the other. There are smears of red, white, pink, and gray paint on the palette, and there are some marks on the wall behind him.

Here is a confession: Since my early 20s, I have been in love with a terrorist.

This is him. My No. 1 guy, my problematic fave: Jacques-Louis David, painter of the French Revolution and everything that came after.

In the 1780s, David rocketed to the forefront of European painting with a severe new style of depiction. His ambitions led him all the way into a new government, which he served with lethal devotion.

It’s a self-portrait with the usual attributes. Brush in one hand, palette in the other.

His face is still youthful, but his eyes have seen it all: the execution of a king, the execution of a queen.

And the background does not disclose the setting: a Paris prison cell where he was confined in 1794, once the Reign of Terror he championed — he facilitated — came to an end.


A painting of Socrates, about to drink the hemlock that will kill him. He sits on what appears to be a bed, near the center of the picture, surrounded by people draped in colorful cloth. Some look at him, while others look away or hold their heads in their hands. He wears a white cloth that bares his chest and stomach. With his left hand, he points toward the ceiling; with his right hand, he reaches for a cup, which is held by a person in a red cloth whose head is turned, and whose eyes are hidden. In the background, on the left, an archway opens onto a stairwell, where a few more people are standing.

Like many great romances, my 20-year affair with David has been a tortured one.

When I was young I was gripped by the zeal of this painter-politician, even if I was a little scared of where it led. Here was an artist who didn’t just represent the world, but actually changed it.

He made moral clarity an artform unto itself. His art was serious: deadly serious.

Honor. Martyrdom. Dying for principle — dying and also killing — on the bleeding edge of history. Yet when the political winds shifted, he seemed to betray every one of his high-minded ideals.

Many young people have dreams of revolution, and I had my share. But David’s dreams also made me shudder.


A photograph of a museumgoer wearing a quilted blue jacket and facing a very large painting. The painting depicts the coronation of Napoleon, in Notre-Dame Cathedral, with a richly dressed crowd in attendance. The museumgoer stands off to the right.

His treacherous genius has been on view, these last few months, in a once-a-generation retrospective at the Musée du Louvre.

The very building that his fellow revolutionaries had transformed from a palace to a museum, in the same year they lopped off the king’s head.

David was a revolutionary whose nerves failed him. An uncompromising artist, and also an utter sellout.


Back to the story’s main image.

Who was he, really, underneath it all?

As long as I have wrestled with history’s most dangerous painter — I have stared him down, eye to eye, for half my life — I have never been able to say. And maybe he couldn’t either.



A photograph of a large-scale painting — a Roman scene — in a museum gallery room.

The young painter made his name with grandly scaled tableaux, often inspired by the Roman republic, of men going to war or pledging their honor.

A closer view of the painting: In the center stands a bearded man draped in gray and red cloth. He’s holding three swords with their blades facing down, and he’s facing three helmeted men who reach out their arms to him from the left side of the picture. On the right sit several women and children — leaning on one another, apparently in consolation.

In the mid-1780s, the waning years of France’s ancien régime, David painted this: the “Oath of the Horatii,” an icy manifesto, 14 feet wide, of martial patriotism.

For decades, the country’s hottest painters had favored ornament, whimsy, courtly romance. Count him out. David’s young men, ready to die, give us something new: hard bodies. Cold spaces. Stern lessons in virtue.

But not all virtues. Not piety, and certainly not love. The virtues are civic: rectitude, duty, sacrifice. For these ideals, you must be ready to give everything.


A detailed sketch of a large, boisterous crowd gathered on an indoor tennis court — a big room with a high ceiling. In the center, a man stands on a table. He faces forward, raising his right hand and holding a piece of paper in his left hand. Along the left and right sides of the room, up near the ceiling, there are rows of open windows, where more people look in and curtains billow.

Comes 1789, comes summer. The bad harvests and the wild privileges have grown unbearable. Amid the bread riots, a suggestion from the queen: Perhaps you might try cake instead?

It’s June 20, and we’re in Versailles. The commoners summoned by King Louis XVI have proclaimed themselves the country’s rightful legislature, but they panic that Louis’s troops are after them.

So they assemble instead on a tennis court, and they swear an oath: Until they have a constitution, they’re not disbanding.

By July 14, when insurgents in Paris storm the local prison, a new political era has dawned.

The revolutionaries call for a painter. It could only be him.

A scrolling display of historical images — mostly black-and-white prints on yellowed pages — showing scenes from the French revolution: fighting in the streets, a trial, guillotines. There are also, amid these, a portrait of Jacques-Louis David and a sketch of Marie Antoinette.

The French Revolution was underway, and David leapt out of the studio and into the action.

He joined the Jacobins, led by his friend Maximilien de Robespierre.

He was no great orator. He had a speech impediment, made worse by a swollen cheek, the result of a youthful fencing accident. But he had other ways of being heard.

He went into public office. In 1792, David won a seat in the elected revolutionary assembly — France’s first government without a monarch at its head.

History was moving faster than his brush. During the Terror he put his signature on paintings of young martyrs — and also on arrest warrants.

David became a member of two of the new government’s most fearsome committees. He was in charge of interrogations.

And when the fate of the king — the king who had once been his patron — came before the revolutionary assembly, David did not hesitate.

“Louis the Last” was guilty, on 33 counts. The painter voted to sentence the king to death, with no reprieve.



A photograph of a painting in a darkened room in a museum.

Dictator of the arts, David in 1793 headed off any royalist revanchism with the greatest work of propaganda ever painted: his friend, the assassinated journalist Jean-Paul Marat, slouched in the bath like Christ off the cross.

A closer view of the painting: A dead or dying man sits in a bath, slumped over to his right side. His head is wrapped in a white cloth, his eyes are closed and he has a gash in his chest. The bath water is bloody, and the tub itself is draped in green and white cloth. The man holds a blood-stained piece of paper in his left hand and a quill in his right. There is a bloody knife with a white handle on the ground beside him. Next to the bath is a wooden box, with another quill, an inkpot and some papers on top of it. There is some writing on the side of the box, including the words “À Marat” and “David.”

He debuted it here, at the Louvre, on October 16, 1793 — mere hours after Marie Antoinette met the razor.

“Year Two,” it says on the box. His friends had devised a whole new calendar for this new age. In that year (1793-94) David was busy staging parades and festivals, and would finish no painting but this one.

David had reached the summit of cultural power. He’d refashioned art into an instrument of republican virtue.

But it only lasted a year. Robespierre was arrested in July 1794. David had vowed, like a principled Greek or Roman, to die alongside his friend. “I’ll drink the hemlock with you,” the painter swore.

Back to the story’s main image.

But on the day of the coup, who could have supposed, David ghosted him.

He was arrested, all the same, a week later. Imprisoned in the Hôtel des Fermes Générales in 1794, he sat before the mirror — and depicted himself with zero political attributes.

Dumb as a painter.

It is a self-portrait of the most inscrutable spirit. His mouth is ringed with gray stubble, and his misshaped cheek is in slight shadow.

David is now 46. But his unkempt hair and searching eyes belong to a man half his age.

Look, too, at how he grips his brush and palette. The hands: so taut, so strained. The thumb, pressing down so hard the nailbed turns white.

Interrogations, persecutions, denunciations, executions … did I do that? The time of politics is over. He is anxious to work. Anxious to paint his innocence — and the innocence of painting itself.


A detailed sketch of a Roman scene: A bearded man sits in shadow in the foreground, holding a piece of paper in his left hand and raising his right hand to his head. Behind him, other men carry out bodies covered by sheets. Off to his side, a woman raises her arms and moves toward the bodies and the men carrying them. She appears to be in distress, as do several others who are clustered around her.

How the world turns. In the run-up to the revolution, David began his most celebrated picture of Roman virtue. It’s a scene of a family in public life, in the first days of a fragile political age.

The new republic is not yet stable, the consul knows, and a conspiracy is afoot to bring back the monarchy.

The consul finds out. He has the conspirators arrested. They are tried, tortured, executed.

A finished version of the sketch seen above: The composition and the figures in it are much the same, but here they are rendered in colorful paint.

The trouble is: The schemers include two of his own sons.

Their mother wails in anguish as the slaves bring their bodies through.

But their father refuses even to turn his head. David’s moral is pitiless: For virtue, for the republic, you must be ready to sacrifice your children.



A sketch of a woman on a yellowed, widely gridded sheet of paper. She is draped in a white cloth and stretching her arms out to her sides. Her head is turned to her left. Beneath her, in small letters, is some writing in script.

But after the Terror, after his fall, languishing in another prison cell, he starts dreaming up a big new painting on an uncommon theme.

Close-up of a painting showing the same woman, now surrounded by other figures: women and children, and men holding shields and swords.

It’s going to be an appeal for peace, depicting brave women interceding between the warring Romans and Sabines.

A slightly wider view, showing women holding children up high above their heads, and men holding spears.

They are holding their babies aloft on the frontline. Think of your families, they’re pleading. Look at your children and stop this fight.

The full painting: women and their children; men — many of them nude save for helmets and neck shawls — wielding their weapons; horses; and a large building in the background.

The message has changed completely. Is any cause worth dying for, now?



A photograph of a painting in a museum.

Because by 1799, when he finished the “Sabines,” a new political order had taken shape. David saw it coming. He was not too pure to paint it.

A closer view of the painting, which shows Napoleon astride a rearing white horse. He wears military dress, including a bicorne hat, and he’s wrapped in an orange cape. His left hand is gloved and holds the horse’s reins; his right hand is bare and points ahead. Behind him, soldiers push a cannon and a French flag waves. Mountains rise in the background.

For the next 15 years, David would employ his gift for propaganda to the glory of Napoleon Bonaparte. The painter who’d voted to kill a king would exalt an emperor who put a crown on his own head.

The fallen republic’s artist-in-chief became the new empire’s finest spin doctor.


When you lose something, when the incentives change, do you give up your beliefs? Did you ever believe them at all?

Many historians and critics have described David’s jailhouse self-portrait as a craven rebrand. The later Napoleonic pictures were the proof: This was an insincere mea culpa to save his career, and his head.

As always with David, the painting’s more dangerous than that. What I saw in Paris this winter, staring him down again after all these decades, is that this self-portrait calls the very idea of self-knowledge into doubt.

A different version of the story’s main image: It’s the same picture, but the colors are warmer and there appears to be less texture.

I couldn’t see it until now. On all my previous visits, David’s self-portrait looked more like this: jaundiced, heavy with oxidized varnish. For the Louvre’s current show, it’s been especially cleaned.

The cleaning has revealed much freer brushwork than I’d realized was there.

In the quickly sketched upholstery of his chair.

In the softly touched curls of his unpowdered hair.

There are newly revealed brown gashes, at left: probably where he was cleaning his brushes in the isolation of the cell. It all feels faster than before, more agitated, less certain.

And, for the first time ever, I could see the color in the face. The yellow daub above the arched right eyebrow. The touches of blue elaborating his undereyes. And the intense black of his pupils: Never has the stare unsettled me more.

A photograph of the story’s main image, framed and hanging in a darkened room in a museum.

What do those eyes say? In the dark gallery of the Louvre’s David exhibition, in the shadow of his propaganda, the gaze appears so intense and searching that it betrays an utter cluelessness. A loss of self.

He was never a real ideologue, David. His letters give no suggestion of deep political thinking. Maybe he just liked power. But look at what is happening as he tries, desperately, to propagandize for himself.

He’s trying, so hard, to confirm an identity — David, painter; never David, politician. And he seems incapable of reaching any interiority at all.

Back to the story’s main image.

It is that self-blindness I have come to value most in David, my deepest and wrongest love. The most influential painter of his time, all alone in his cell, cannot penetrate his own heart.

It can happen, you know, when politics becomes a bloodsport. The legislator must vote absolutely: aye or nay, life or death. But the painter — here is his power, and also his tragedy — can give a third answer: I just don’t know.

More in this series

How Lunar Photography Brought the Heavens Down to Earth

Piercing the Shadows of the Pope’s Favorite Painting

Finding the Key to Cézanne, the First Painter I Ever Loved



What to Watch

What to Stream in January
‘Disneyland Handcrafted’
‘Kidnapped: Elizabeth Smart’
‘Clika’
‘Mr. Nobody Against Putin’
You have been granted access, use your keyboard to continue reading.
Skip to contentSkip to site indexSection Navigation
A Fan Favorite Finally Takes the ‘Bridgerton’ Spotlight
As his character assumes the lead in a new season, Luke Thompson is bringing Shakespearean depth to one of the buzziest streaming shows of our time.

Credit...


Listen to this article · 8:09 min Learn more
Share full article

5
By Eleanor StanfordVisuals by Kalpesh Lathigra
Reporting from London

Jan. 23, 2026

People tend to frown when Luke Thompson compares “Bridgerton” to Shakespeare.

But the British actor, who leads the latest season of Netflix’s blockbuster romance show and has been performing the Bard’s plays for more than a decade, was resolute in an interview at a London hotel: “In its essence, ‘Bridgerton’ has a very Shakespearean sensibility,” he said.

Both deal in heightened reality and both have used historical settings — onscreen, Britain’s Regency era; in plays like “A Midsummer Night’s Dream,” ancient Athens — to explore contemporary concerns, said the actor, 37.

Like the string quartet playing pop hits on “Bridgerton,” Shakespeare’s writing, in its day, was “much more populist, as well as accessible” than today’s audiences, adjusting to the iambic pentameter, often realize, Thompson said.

The upcoming season of “Bridgerton” seems to strengthen his argument. In this fourth installment, which comes to Netflix on Jan. 29, Thompson’s character Benedict Bridgerton falls for a maid pretending to be a lady at a dreamlike masked ball. “That comedy of meeting in disguise,” Thompson said, is also “very Shakespeare.”

ImageA black-and-white close-up portrait of Luke Thompson looking off-camera.
“I hate talking about myself,” Thompson said. “So doing this is a challenge — but a good challenge.”
Finding common ground between hallowed literary texts and one of our time’s buzziest streaming shows is characteristic of the curiosity Thompson brings to his work. That includes playing Benedict, which was one of his “first proper screen roles” when he was cast in 2019, he said. His character has long been a fan favorite: the charming second son who provides a foil to his serious older brother Anthony, played by Jonathan Bailey, and moral support to his feminist-minded younger sister Eloise.

Outside the family home, Benedict enjoys parties, artistic pursuits and sexual fluidity. By the beginning of the fourth season, he has been indulging in these pleasures so much his mother accuses him of becoming a rake.

To the striving society of mothers and debutante daughters, this doesn’t lessen his appeal on the marriage market. “What really matters is his surname,” one pushy mother tells her daughters, adding that, anyway, “everyone knows reformed rakes make the best husbands.”

Image
Claudia Jessie and Luke Thompson stand in a garden among people in Regency-era formal wear.
Claudia Jessie, left, as Eloise Bridgerton and Thompson as her brother Benedict in Season 3 of “Bridgerton.”Credit...Liam Daniel/Netflix
But the Bridgerton siblings are in the market for true love (which, on the show, also inevitably leads to marriage). In Season 4, we see Benedict contemplating finally making a commitment to wed after his masked ball meet-cute. “Benedict’s plight is like a lot of people’s plight nowadays,” Thompson said, “which is that you do have to make a choice.”

The mysterious woman at the ball, Sophie (Yerin Ha), was the daughter of an Earl, but has been supporting herself following her father’s death, unlike many of the women clamoring for Benedict’s hand. She is independent-minded enough to hold Benedict to account for his libertine behavior — something that terrifies his character, Thompson said.

When he’s not flitting around town, viewers get insight into Benedict’s emotions during his heart-to-hearts with Eloise, played by Claudia Jessie, on the swings in the family garden. From the first time they shot one such swing scene, Jessie said that acting opposite Thompson “didn’t really feel like work.”

The pair have been playing Bridgertons, intermittently, for seven years now, and in that time, the actors have grown with their characters, Jessie said. Thompson “really cares about the craft of acting, more than I can say I do,” she said, which “I always find quite romantic.”

A different Bridgerton sibling’s love story anchors each season, based on the romance novels of the American author Julia Quinn. Following the books, Season 3 should have had Benedict’s story in focus, but in what could be seen as typical for a second son, it was delayed so that the growing romance between Penelope (Nicola Coughlan) and the third Bridgerton brother, Colin (Luke Newton) could first take center stage.

Image
In a black-and-white photo, Luke Thompson sits on a sofa with his legs crossed and looks to the side.
With the new attention Season 4 would bring, he had been thinking about how to protect both his personal life, Thompson said, as well as “the actual job I want to do, which is be other people.”
Now, it’s finally Benedict’s turn. “We were all very excited to do his season,” said Tom Verica, a “Bridgerton” producer and director, “because for so long he’s been the playful comic relief while the focus was on other people.”

When Newton was preparing to lead Season 3 as Colin, he asked the previous male leads for guidance, but that wasn’t Thompson’s style. “Luke was always ready to do this,” Newton said. “I knew that he just didn’t need any advice.”

Newton added that, on set, he looked to Thompson as a model well before his character was a lead. From the first season, “Luke was amazing at incorporating a modern-day physicality into this Regency-style performance,” Newton said, “which paved the way for me into how I was going to use physicality in my performance.”

The only tips Newton said he had for Thompson were around juggling the new commitments that come with being a “Bridgerton” colead. Those include the show’s notoriously extensive promotional campaign.

“I hate talking about myself,” Thompson said over coffee on his second day of promo for Season 4. “So doing this is a challenge — but a good challenge.”

Image
Thompson, wearing a patterned vest and holding a kite string, looks upward with a smile. Beside him, Yerin Ha in a light blue dress and silver shawl also looks toward the sky.
In Season 4 of “Bridgerton,” Benedict meets Sophie, played by Yerin Ha, left, a mysterious masked woman who holds him to account for his libertine behavior.Credit...Liam Daniel/Netflix
In conversation Thompson was warm and especially expansive when discussing the craft of acting. With the new attention Season 4 would bring, he had been thinking about how to protect both his personal life, Thompson said, as well as “the actual job I want to do, which is be other people.”

Had this sort of leading turn come when he was 20, “I probably wouldn’t be alive,” Thompson said with a wry laugh. That age was a “destabilizing time,” he added: He had just moved back to Britain after a childhood and adolescence spent just outside Paris.

Thompson took piano lessons from age 6, and because his parents — an engineer and a teacher — are British, “I spoke English, but I was sort of half-at-home at English, and half-not,” the actor said. “I was very French.”

In England, people expected him to know cultural references he just didn’t, and so Thompson had to “fill in a language that wasn’t mine, and make it mine.”

“I guess that’s acting, isn’t it?” he said: “taking words that aren’t yours and making them yours.”

Thompson spent a year on a theater course in Stratford-upon-Avon, Shakespeare’s hometown, before studying English and Drama at Bristol University. “Ever since I’ve been young, I think being on a stage or in front of a group of people, simultaneously hiding and revealing things, is perfect,” Thompson said.

Image
Close-up portrait of Luke Thompson with his eyes closed.
In England, people expected him to know cultural references he just didn’t, and so Thompson, who was raised in France, had to “fill in a language that wasn’t mine, and make it mine.”
Still, committing to acting was a “slow process,” he said. He had applied unsuccessfully to drama school before college, but in his senior year, he decided to try one more time, and was accepted onto a three-year program at the prestigious Royal Academy of Dramatic Art in London. (In the end, “I studied too much,” he said.)

His first job was at Shakespeare’s Globe Theater in London. “It was such a revelation,” he said, “that, wow, these plays can actually be fun and funny.”

Since being cast on “Bridgerton,” Thompson has bounced between filming seasons and high-profile stage roles, including Willem in Ivo van Hove’s “A Little Life” in the West End and Berowne in a recent Royal Shakespeare Company production of “Love’s Labour’s Lost.”

In the ongoing debates over whether to modernize, or not to modernize, Shakespeare, Thompson is firmly in the former camp. “They’re amazing plays,” he said, “but you need to be allowed to snip them, and cut them, and arrange them so they can still speak to people.”

That chimes with the approach of Robert Icke, the British director whose “Oedipus” is currently on Broadway starring Mark Strong and Lesley Manville.

Image
A man in a soft shirt and dark pants sits on a light-colored sofa looking down at his feet.
“They’re amazing plays,” Thompson said of Shakespeare, “but you need to be allowed to snip them, and cut them, and arrange them so they can still speak to people.”
Thompson and Icke first worked together on the “Oresteia” in 2015, and Thompson later played Laertes in Icke’s “Hamlet,” with Andrew Scott in the title role. Icke said Thompson’s nuanced perspective on Laertes’ motivations toward the end of the play “became so important, I think, to our view of the whole picture.”

Thompson isn’t an actor who is motivated by gaining recognition or becoming a brand ambassador, Icke said. Whether he’s among the wisteria-covered houses on “Bridgerton,” or onstage in Shakespeare, Thompson said that acting was “a way that I understand myself, and try to understand myself.” It was, he added, “glowing, scintillating proof of the fact that we’re not just imprisoned by our experience.”

He would like to try acting in French and find a role that lets him play piano. He would love to play Hamlet, or Iago. But there’s time.


Skip to contentSkip to site indexSection Navigation
Search
Subscribe for $0.25/week
Log in
What to Watch

What to Stream in January
‘Disneyland Handcrafted’
‘Kidnapped: Elizabeth Smart’
‘Clika’
‘Mr. Nobody Against Putin’
You have been granted access, use your keyboard to continue reading.
5 Takeaways From the HBO Documentary ‘Mel Brooks: The 99 Year Old Man!’
Judd Apatow, who co-directed, offered insights into the making of the two-part film, a loving portrait of a comedy giant who’s still sharp as ever.


Listen to this article · 7:29 min Learn more
Share full article

72
A grainy black-white-image of a young man wearing a tie in a midcentury diner, sipping coffee.
Mel Brooks in younger years, as seen in archival material included in the HBO documentary “Mel Brooks: The 99 Year Old Man!”Credit...Mel Brooks/HBO
Melena Ryzik
By Melena Ryzik
Jan. 23, 2026
Mel Brooks will turn 100 in June, and he has been interviewed for almost 80 of those years. Still, when his pal Judd Apatow approached him about doing a documentary, “I encountered plenty of resistance,” Apatow said, recalling his subject’s stance: “Why is there any need to do this? Is this what I want to be doing with my time?”

Apatow eventually won him over. “My main argument to him was, ‘But Mel, this allows me and you to hang out a lot!’” The result is a two-part, nearly four-hour, very loving film, “Mel Brooks: The 99 Year Old Man!”

The documentary, Part 1 of which premiered Thursday on HBO (both parts are streaming on HBO Max), charts Brooks’s life and career, from his hardscrabble origins in Brooklyn to becoming the filmmaker behind comedy classics like “The Producers,” “Young Frankenstein,” “Blazing Saddles” and the “Star Wars” spoof “Spaceballs.” (A sequel to “Spaceballs” is coming next year, with Brooks as a producer and star.)

Image
Brooks and Judd Apatow stand together and smile in front of a giant board displaying the title of the film. 
“My main argument to him was, ‘But Mel, this allows me and you to hang out a lot!’” Judd Apatow, right, recalled telling Brooks in persuading him to participate. Credit...Jennelle Fong for The New York Times
He speaks movingly of his long marriage to the actress Anne Bancroft, who died in 2005, and his friendship with the writer-director Carl Reiner. Their “2000 Year Old Man” routines, released as albums beginning in 1960, drove Brooks’s ascent into performance. Reiner died in 2020, at 98, still Brooks’s best friend, but the film includes footage from archival interviews. Reiner’s son, the filmmaker Rob Reiner, also appears, in one of the final conversations recorded before his death last month.

Apatow and his co-director, Michael Bonfiglio, filmed 10 hours of interviews with Brooks in 2024 and 2025. The aim, Apatow said last week by phone, was “to ask questions that he might not have had to answer before.”

There are jokes too; Brooks remains astoundingly sharp. “When you talk to him, it makes you feel bad about yourself,” Apatow said, “because he’s not reaching for an obscure name from the 40s — and I’m getting my kids’ names mixed up. He couldn’t be funnier.”

Brooks’s success, he says in the film, offers a message to “little short trepidatious Jews that are trying to enter show business. If I can do it, you can do it.”

Here are some highlights from the documentary.

A Veteran, and a Club Impresario
Image
A faded black-and-white photo of a young Brooks in a military uniform and helmet, a cigarette dangling from his lips. 
Brooks saw combat in World War II, an experience that shaped him. “If you don’t get killed in the Army, you can learn a lot,” he said.Credit...Mel Brooks/HBO
Brooks grew up in Williamsburg, Brooklyn, with a widowed mother and three older brothers. All four boys enlisted in the military during World War II, and miraculously, all returned. At 18, Brooks was an Army engineer; he said he first encountered antisemitism during his training in Virginia — because “every single human being in Brooklyn was a Jew.”

His battalion saw combat. “War changed me,” he told Apatow. He had some post-traumatic stress; a backfiring car made him jumpy. But Brooks, wryly, also found a silver lining: “If you don’t get killed in the Army, you can learn a lot.”

He was a drummer, and as a boy he took lessons from the jazz great Buddy Rich, a Brooklyn neighbor. And he was gigging even as a teen. So when an officer’s nightclub opened in Germany, he was put in charge of entertainment. “He became almost a nightclub impresario,” Apatow said — all before his military discharge at age 20.

Impostor Syndrome, Then Hits
Image
Brooks smiles big, standing between Nathan Lane and Matthew Broderick, his arms draped around their shoulders. 
Brooks with Nathan Lane, left, and Matthew Broderick, who played the leads in the wildly successful Broadway musical adaptation of “The Producers.” Credit...Mel Brooks/HBO
Brooks’s rise was so quick — by 25, he was a writer on “Your Show of Shows,” the influential TV variety series starring Sid Caesar — that it’s hard to imagine he ever faltered.

But he did. He always feared being told he didn’t deserve the writing job — impostor syndrome. “I always find that shocking,” Apatow said, “because he seems like the most confident man on the planet.” That terror was also, Apatow said, the engine that drove him to work harder.

Still, he had fallow years, especially after “Your Show of Shows” ended. When he met Bancroft, he was essentially broke, trying to become a director.

“The Producers,” his first feature, was a risky satire about two unscrupulous theater-makers who devise a flop musical — about Adolf Hitler — to swindle their investors. It struggled for distribution. But it earned Brooks an Oscar for best original screenplay in 1969. “I want to thank the Academy of Arts, Sciences, and money, for this wonderful award,” he began his speech.

Thirty-plus years later, the film became a blockbuster musical, winning 12 Tonys, still a record.

The (Secret) Producer
Image
Brooks and David Lynch stand in front of a red curtain, both of them smiling warmly. Brooks appears to be making a joke. 
Brooks was instrumental in elevating the career of David Lynch, whom he chose to direct “The Elephant Man,” which Brooks produced. Credit...Frazer Harrison/Getty Images
Comedy heavyweights like Conan O’Brien, Dave Chappelle and Tracey Ullman extol Brooks in the doc. So does the filmmaker David Lynch. “He was sick but loved Mel so much,” Apatow recalled of what was possibly Lynch’s last interview before his death, last January. “I said to him, ‘What are your favorite Mel movies?’ And he said: ‘I don’t think I’ve seen any of them. I don’t care about any of his movies. I just love the man.’”

As a producer, Brooks chose Lynch to direct a script for “The Elephant Man” (1980), Lynch’s Oscar-nominated breakout. Lynch’s only previous feature was the cult movie “Eraserhead,” which Brooks loved. Brooks “used all of his gravitas to support David’s vision,” Apatow said. “It completely helped him begin his incredible career.”

Lynch is gushing onscreen. “Mel’s a smart fellow,” he says. “He knows about human nature — so much.”

Producing other artists’ films “was a way for Mel to show another side of himself,” Apatow said, though Brooks often went uncredited, lest his name bias audiences. In the ’80s, he produced Oscar-nominated films like “Frances,” starring Jessica Lange; “My Favorite Year,” with Peter O’Toole; and David Cronenberg’s “The Fly.”

The Reiners
Image
Four people smile and pose together outdoors for a group photo. Brooks, wearing sunglasses, makes a funny face. 
From left, Estelle Reiner, Brooks, Anne Bancroft and Carl Reiner. Brooks and Reiner were very close friends for many decades. Credit...Mel Brooks/HBO
Rob Reiner recounts being a preschooler when he met Brooks, who was sleeping on his parents’ couch. For decades, the families were extremely close; in their 90s, after Carl Reiner and Brooks became widowers, they spent their evenings together, having dinner on TV trays and watching “Jeopardy.” And when Reiner collapsed at home shortly before his death, Brooks was there, shouting at the paramedics to revive him. “I wouldn’t accept it,” he says in the film. “I loved him so much.”

In the film, Rob Reiner explains their deep friendship. As Apatow summarized, “Mel’s father died when he was 2, and he looked to Carl as a father figure.”

At 99, loss is inevitable. Onscreen, Brooks describes his path through grief: “Find something in you that gives you the grit and the courage to get through.” The universe, he says, doesn’t want you to suffer.

The murder of Rob and his wife, Michele Singer Reiner, in December casts a shadow on his appearance in the film, and Apatow sounded emotional as he discussed it.

“The movie was completely finished, and I did not go back and watch it,” he said. “Rob just couldn’t have been warmer or more open about everything, and funny. It was a really special day, getting to speak to him.”

The Weight of the Joke
Image
Brooks, wearing a suit with no tie but a red kerchief, smiles and spreads his hands wide while sitting on a couch. 
Brooks’s success offers a message to “little short trepidatious Jews that are trying to enter show business,” he says in the film. “If I can do it, you can do it.”Credit...HBO
Brooks’s oeuvre is slapstick-y, sure, but the documentary also underscores it as deft satire. His commentary on class, religion and race — the 1974 Western parody “Blazing Saddles,” with Richard Pryor as a screenwriter, brashly mocked racial prejudice — was ahead of its time, the documentary argues.

“He has a real sense of justice and standing up for the little guy,” Apatow said. “His willingness to speak up has been an inspiration to so many new comedy figures.”

Brooks insists the laughs are paramount. But he knows their weight. “Sometimes my comedy is just to celebrate the joy of being alive,” he says in the film. “And sometimes it is philosophical, and ideological, and I use it as skillfully as I know how.”

A correction was made on Jan. 23, 2026: An earlier version of a picture caption with this article reversed the order of the subjects in a photograph of Nathan Lane, Mel Brooks and Matthew Broderick. Lane is on the left, not the right.
When we learn of a mistake, we acknowledge it with a correction. If you spot an error, please let us know at corrections@nytimes.com.Learn more

Melena Ryzik is a roving culture reporter at The Times, covering the personalities, projects and ideas that drive the creative world.

Skip to contentSkip to site indexSection Navigation
Search
Log in
Performances in N.Y.C.

Broadway Guide
‘The Disappear’
‘Sons of Echo’
‘Bug’
‘Tartuffe’
You have a preview view of this article while we are checking your access. When we have confirmed access, the full article content will load.
Critic’s Pick

Review: A Warning of American Despair Returns to the Philharmonic
Thomas Adès led the New York Philharmonic in an expanded version of his “America: A Prophecy” that strikes notes of caution and consolation.


Listen to this article · 5:16 min Learn more
Share full article

6
In the foreground, seated orchestra members play on a stage, facing a conductor standing at a podium and a pianist in a red dress sitting at the keyboard. Obscured audience members are seen in the background.
Thomas Adès leading the New York Philharmonic in Einojuhani Rautavaara’s Piano Concerto No. 1, with Yuja Wang, at David Geffen Hall on Thursday.Credit...Chris Lee
Joshua Barone
By Joshua Barone
Jan. 23, 2026
New York PhilharmonicNYT Critic’s Pick
Near the end of the 20th century, the New York Philharmonic presented a concert entirely of world premieres: five works that it called Messages for the Millennium. A bit hokey, with a mandate to offer “a universal message of hope to the people of the world,” it was tempered by a rebellious response from an iconoclastic young composer named Thomas Adès.

Instead of hope he gave the audience a warning. His contribution, “America: A Prophecy,” drew on Mayan and Spanish poetry for a portrait of fragility and a vision of apocalypse, with a chillingly desolate ending that left you in a dense cloud of ash and despair.

Now Adès has returned to the piece, revising and expanding it to include a coda with a wiser, longer view of history. It resonates even more than it did in the heady days of 1999, when a computer glitch seemed to be as bad as things could get.

The new version of “America: A Prophecy” had its local premiere on Thursday, conducted by Adès in an extraordinarily programmed Philharmonic concert that included another Messages for the Millennium commission, Kaija Saariaho’s “Oltra Mar,” as well as Charles Ives’s dreamily American work Orchestral Set No. 2 and Einojuhani Rautavaara’s virtuosically combative First Piano Concerto.

On paper the Rautavaara, while a rarity, had the look of a main attraction with Yuja Wang at the keyboard. And it was certainly the most spectacular performance of the night, opening with a piano solo in which the right hand pounds clusters like claps of thunder while the left seems to scurry in fright.

Skip to contentSkip to site indexSection Navigation
Search
Art & Design
Subscribe for $0.25/week
Log in
You have been granted access, use your keyboard to continue reading.
Beatriz González, Who Chronicled Colombia’s Turmoil in Paint, Dies at 93
Often drawing from reproduced images or newspaper photos, she made work that quietly yet memorably critiqued her country’s social and political order.


Listen to this article · 8:17 min Learn more
Share full article


A woman with shoulder-length brown hair, a red jacket and a purple scarf looks up at the camera, surrounded by copies of an image of a woman with dark hair and a red dress covering her mouth with her hands.
The Colombian artist Beatriz González supervising the installation of an exhibition of her work at a gallery in Bogotá in 2019. Credit...Claudia Rubio/GDA, via Associated Press
Adam Nossiter
By Adam Nossiter
Jan. 24, 2026, 3:53 p.m. ET
Beatriz González, a Colombian artist who transformed mass-produced images into quietly subversive paintings that called into question her country’s social and political order, died on Jan. 9 at her home in Bogotá, the capital of Colombia. She was 93.

Her death was announced in a statement by the office of the mayor of Bogotá and the Colombian culture ministry, which said that her work “revolutionized the relationship between art, politics, memory and the city.”

Ms. González was one of Latin America’s foremost late-20th-century artists. Her work was exhibited throughout the world, including at Tate Modern in London; CAPC, the contemporary art museum in Bordeaux, France; the Museum of Modern Art and Museo del Barrio in New York; and the Museum of Fine Arts, Houston.

But her subject matter, style and vision remained intensely local, reflecting her preoccupations with the violence that permeated life in Colombia; the European “high culture” that filtered its way across the Atlantic in cheap reproductions; and the in-your-face commercial aesthetic of pervasive urban advertising.

Advertisement

SKIP ADVERTISEMENT
Her middle-period paintings are splashes of vibrant, violent colors, like “Los Papagayos” (“The Parrots,” 1987), in which Belisario Betancur, then the Colombian president, and his generals are flattened into a row and depicted with aggressive reds, oranges and greens.

Image
A painting of red-faced men in military forms lined up.
Ms. González’s 1987 painting “Los Papagayos (“The Parrots”), depicts Belisario Betancur, then the Colombian president, and his generals, flattened into a row and rendered in aggressive reds, oranges and greens.Credit...Beatriz González/Pérez Art Museum Miami
She was sometimes compared to Andy Warhol in her willful distortions of commonplace images, but Ms. González insisted she was not making Pop Art.

“No, I considered my work a provincial type of painting,” she said in a 2015 interview with Tate Modern, adding that she “painted the joy of the underdeveloped.”

Advertisement

SKIP ADVERTISEMENT
“Mine was a provincial type of art,” she repeated, “without horizons, confronting the everyday.”

Image
Ms. González wearing a worn white coat as a smock as she is surrounded by several drawings in charcoal.
Ms. González in 2019. “I considered my work a provincial type of painting,” she said, adding that she “painted the joy of the underdeveloped.”Credit...César Melgarejo/GDA, via Associated Press
By “provincial,” she was nodding to the freedom she felt starting out as an artist in a country with no real art market, no patrons and “more importantly, no critics and no art publications,” she said in an interview for the catalog of a 1973 exhibition at the Museo de Arte Moderno in Bogotá.

How The Times decides who gets an obituary. There is no formula, scoring system or checklist in determining the news value of a life. We investigate, research and ask around before settling on our subjects. If you know of someone who might be a candidate for a Times obituary, please suggest it here.

Learn more about our process.
Ms. González took what was available to her in a place cut off from cutting-edge artistic currents — cheap reproductions of fine art, poorly reproduced newspaper photographs illustrating sensational crime stories, bargain furniture from Bogotá’s flea markets — and made it into work that reflected the reality of the society in which she lived.

The painting that established her reputation, “Los Suicidas del Sisga” (“The Suicides of the Sisga,” 1965), was based on a grainy photograph of a young couple clasping hands. Ms. González had found the photo in a newspaper, where it accompanied a story about how the couple had committed suicide together in the Sisga River to preserve the purity of their union.

Image
A painting in vibrant colors — yellow flowers, red background, green and blue coats — depicts a couple looking out at the viewer with vague smiles, their hands touching.
She established her reputation with “Los Suicidas del Sisga” (“The Suicides of the Sisga,” 1965), a series of paintings based on a newspaper photograph of a couple that committed suicide together.Credit...Beatriz González, via the National Museum of Colombia
Here, as elsewhere, Ms. González was “attracted to the image’s reductive qualities, the way the poor printing abstracted its details,” the curator and critic Tobias Ostrander wrote in the catalog for a 2019 retrospective of her work at the Pérez Art Museum in Miami.

Ms. González made three versions of the painting. In all of them, the image is almost banal, the couple’s smiles vague and vacant.

Advertisement

SKIP ADVERTISEMENT
“With its simplified forms and eye-catching colors, it could be a folk painting: a shop sign, say, sentimentally promoting the rewards of married life,” the New York Times critic Holland Cotter wrote in a review of a 1998 González retrospective at the Museo del Barrio.

But the sentimentality is an illusion; these are people, after all, who are about to kill themselves. As she does throughout her body of work, Ms. González subverts expectations and calls into question received ideas — in this case, popular notions of romantic love.

That will to subvert is a theme running through her career. “Los Reveses de la Realeza” (“The Backside of Royalty,” 1974), shows Princess Anne on a royal visit to Bogotá, her behind visible as the wind catches the back of her dress. A seemingly banal 1968 portrait of a smug, arms-folded Simón Bolívar, painted in bold greens and yellows, caused a scandal, with a conservative journalist accusing Ms. González of disrespecting national history and the great Latin American liberator.

“These were the colors that I saw in shop windows,” Ms. González told the Tate interviewer, “in reinterpretations of universal images that were made in the Third World.”

Her rendering of contemporary Colombian reality reached its culmination in a series of paintings she did in response to a government-launched massacre in November 1985, when Mr. Betancur’s military attacked the leftist guerrilla group M-19, which had occupied Bogotá’s Palace of Justice. The assault killed at least 98, including guerrillas, civilians and 11 judges.

Image
Objects on display in an exhibition gallery include a bed frame, vanity with mirror and wide curtain that have all been painted or drawn on.
An installation of Ms. González’s work in 2017 at the Museum of Modern Art in Frankfurt.Credit...Hans-Georg Roth/Corbis, via Getty Images
Advertisement

SKIP ADVERTISEMENT
“After the palace,” Ms. González later said, “I could not be the same. I could not continue producing pictorial games.”

In 1986 she made three large-scale paintings in oils and pastels, collectively titled “Sr. Presidente Qué Honor Estar Con Usted En Este Momento Histórico” (“Mr. President What an Honor It Is to Be With You in This Historic Moment”).

In one painting, Mr. Betancur, surrounded by his cabinet and henchmen, looks down at a piece of paper while a charred corpse lies on the table in front of him. In another, the president, smiling and wearing sunglasses, contemplates a bouquet placed in the same spot on the table. The figures are simultaneously sinister and banal.

“The flowers transform into a symbol of hypocrisy,” Mr. Ostrander wrote, “a vulgar veneer of normalcy or even elegance that covers cruelty and injustice.”

Image
An older woman with brown hair wears a striped shirt and a chunky brown necklace as she sits in front of a painting.
Ms. González in 2016. Her father “taught me to look at the landscape, from the mountain ranges to the streams flowing from the Magdalena River,” she said, while her mother “helped to train my eye.”Credit...Claudia Rubio/GDA, via Associated Press
Beatriz González Aranda was born on Nov. 16, 1932, in Bucaramanga, a city 250 miles north of Bogotá, the youngest of three children of Valentine González Rangel, a coffee planter who served as the city’s mayor, and Clementina Aranda Mantilla.

Advertisement

SKIP ADVERTISEMENT
Her father “taught me to look at the landscape, from the mountain ranges to the streams flowing from the Magdalena River,” Ms. González said in a 1994 interview, while her mother “helped to train my eye.”

“But they were unable to drill a bourgeois sensibility into me,” she added.

She attended the Santísima Trinidad School in Bucaramanga, founded by Franciscan nuns, and in 1951 entered the Universidad Nacional in Bogotá to study architecture.

She left the school two years later, took art courses and in 1959 enrolled at the Escuela de Arte at the Universidad de los Andes, also in Bogotá, where she continued to paint, graduating with a degree in art history in 1962. Her mentor was the Argentine art critic Marta Traba.

In 1964 she exhibited her work for the first time, at the Museo de Arte Moderno in Bogotá, and married an architect, Urbano Ripoll.

Among her notable later works are “Los Delicios” (“The Delights,” 1997), drawings of anguished Indigenous people; and “Auras Anónimas” (“Anonymous Auras,” 2007-09), an installation in Bogotá’s Central Cemetery consisting of 8,957 silhouettes of people carrying bodies, printed on structures slated for demolition.

Image
A grid of prints has been placed on the outer wall of a small temple-like structure amid patchy grass.
A detail from Ms. González’s “Auras Anónimas” (“Anonymous Auras,” 2007-09), an installation in Bogotá’s Central Cemetery consisting of 8,957 silhouettes of people carrying bodies, printed on structures slated for demolition.Credit...via The Colombian Artistic Research Magazine (CARMA)
Advertisement

SKIP ADVERTISEMENT
Her inspiration was a newspaper photograph of two men carrying a corpse wrapped in a black plastic bag. The figures were, Ms. González said, “the victims, the result of war, drug trafficking, paramilitarism, and violence.”

Ms. Gonzàlez’s husband died in 2024. She is survived by her son, Daniel.

Over the years she resisted interviewers’ attempts to draw her and her career into broader trends in the art world.

“Above all I was focusing on a provincial everyday reality,” she said in the Tate interview. “Universal symbols that underwent a process of transformation through their relocalization in the Third World.”

Adam Nossiter has been bureau chief in Kabul, Paris, West Africa and New Orleans and is now a writer on the Obituaries desk.

Skip to contentSkip to site indexSection Navigation
Search
Log in
What to Watch

What to Stream in January
‘Disneyland Handcrafted’
‘Kidnapped: Elizabeth Smart’
‘Clika’
‘Mr. Nobody Against Putin’
You have been granted access, use your keyboard to continue reading.
Five Action Movies to Stream Now
This month’s picks include lonely swordsmen, buddy cops, and a World War II German tank.

Share full article


A warrior clad in armor holds a sword and looks offscreen.
Ashton Chen in “Blade of Fury.”Credit...Well Go USA Entertainment
By Robert Daniels
Jan. 23, 2026
‘Blade of Fury’
Stream it on Hi-Yah!

Pei Xing … a.k.a. the Jackal (Ashton Chen) is a drunken bounty hunter, who, at the outset of Pengfei Qin’s “Blade of Fury,” tracks down bandits he believes have stolen imperial jewels. Instead, he discovers they’ve taken a courtesan who recently gave birth to the prime minister’s child, who is heir to the throne. She put her baby in hiding and everyone, from the prime minister’s enforcer, Lord Guo (Pema Jyad), to a band of Xing’s former comrades, are after him.

“Blade of Fury” is a classical swordplay movie, relying on a steady camera and assured compositions to capture acrobatic clashes, like the opening showdown between Xing and the bandits. Later, when Xing’s pursuit to protect the child becomes personal, the filmmaking turns to wide framing and hand-held movement so audiences can marvel at the elaborate fight choreography that makes Qin’s sturdy film so enthralling.

Blade of Fury
Blade of Fury
Save to your watch list:


Want to watch

Have seen

Advertisement

SKIP ADVERTISEMENT
‘Lone Samurai’
Rent or buy on most major platforms.

Split into two parts, Josh C. Waller’s “Lone Samurai” concerns Riku (Shogen), a 13th-century samurai who washes up on a seemingly deserted island’s beach after a clash with Kublai Khan’s army. In the film’s meditative first chapter, Riku, who’s consumed by visions of his family, prepares to die by suicide. But by the second chapter, when he’s taken prisoner by the island’s cannibals, he turns to killing.

While “Lone Samurai” could be accused of leaning on tropes, like the bloodthirsty savage, the film isn’t so simplistic. Though Riku sees the islanders as brutes, they believe he’s a demon. This is also a film that loves expansive vistas. During a climactic battle between Riku and this Indigenous tribe on a beach — the always balletic Yayan Ruhian also appears to fight as a witch — vicious violence becomes spellbindingly poetic via slow motion movement and natural lighting soaked in golden hour splendor.

Lone Samurai
Lone Samurai
Save to your watch list:


Want to watch

Have seen

‘The Tank’
Stream it on Amazon Prime Video.

Advertisement

SKIP ADVERTISEMENT
A bit like “Apocalypse Now” meets “Fury,” Dennis Gansel’s hellish World War II period piece “The Tank” goes full throttle through desolation, horror and death. Set in 1943, the film follows a German panzer tank crew led by Lieutenant Philip Gerkens (David Schütter), who are tasked with navigating the Eastern Front to retrieve the lost Officer Paul von Hardenburg (Tilman Strauss).

The draw to Gansel’s film is its mixture of these soldiers’ camaraderie against adverse sights and their internal moral conflicts. For the former, this five-person crew must face down minefields, dive underwater in their tank and square off against their Soviet counterparts in a captivating heavy metal chess match. During their arduous mission, they must consider whether they are simply following orders or playing an active hand in German atrocities. It all culminates with a nightmarish reveal that makes the long journey worth the wait.

The Tank
The Tank
Save to your watch list:


Want to watch

Have seen

‘A Time for Bravery’
Stream it on Netflix.

Advertisement

SKIP ADVERTISEMENT
The Argentine director Ariel Winograd’s action comedy “A Time for Bravery,” set in Mexico City, is a delightful romp with a fun premise that recalls “Lethal Weapon.” Like most buddy cop movies, this one pairs two unlikely partners when Silverstein (Luis Gerardo Méndez), a psychiatrist needing to complete community service, is teamed with Detective Diaz (Memo Villegas), whose wife dumped him, leaving him emotionally broken. It’s up to Silverstein to help Diaz, in order for the cop to investigate a case involving two missing men and stolen uranium.

Much of this comedy’s enjoyment arises from Silverstein and Diaz’s growing friendship, which involves smoking weed, visiting the gun range and teaching Silverstein how to box. The pair must also contend with a corrupt police force and dirty federal officials led by Solares (Christian Tappan). An engrossing raid on a nuclear facility provides some slapstick entertainment by positioning the pencil-neck Silverstein as an unwitting action hero who, much like this film, is compelled by empathy and friendship.

A Time for Bravery
A Time for Bravery
Save to your watch list:


Want to watch

Have seen

‘Thieves Highway’
Rent or buy on most major platforms.

This rough-and-tumble revenge story takes its cues from classic westerns by following the gruff Frank Bennett (Aaron Eckhart), an Oklahoma livestock officer working to find violent cattle rustlers. His pursuit leads him and his friend Bill (Lochlyn Munro) to the middle of nowhere to confront Jones (Devon Sawa) and his murderous crew. Bill dies in the process, leaving Frank stranded and vulnerable against a bloodthirsty Jones.


Skip to contentSkip to site indexSection Navigation
Search
Television
Log in
You have been granted access, use your keyboard to continue reading.
Late Night ROUNDUP

Seth Meyers Says Trump’s Deals Are as Strong as a Pinkie Swear
“At this point, it’s pretty clear world leaders make deals with Trump the way kids do on the playground,” Meyers said of the president on Wednesday.

Share full article


Seth Meyers, wearing a brown pullover sweater, sits behind a desk. Beside him is an inset image of a land mass with the word “Greenland” on it.
The “Late Night” host said President Trump deduced that people wanted “to know more about Epstein Island, so he tried to distract them with a bigger island.”Credit...NBC
Trish Bendix
By Trish Bendix
Jan. 23, 2026
Welcome to Late Night Roundup, a rundown of the previous night’s highlights that lets you sleep — and lets us get paid to watch comedy. Here are the 50 best movies on Netflix right now.

The Art of the New Old Deal
President Trump announced on Wednesday that a framework agreement was reached over the future of Greenland after he met with the secretary general of NATO, Mark Rutte. The deal effectively granted the same military base permissions to the United States as before — or “total access to all the things we already had total access to,” Jimmy Kimmel said on Thursday.

“Trump is not actually a deal-maker, he just plays one on TV,” Seth Meyers said on “Late Night.”

“At this point, it’s pretty clear world leaders make deals with Trump the way kids do on the playground: ‘[imitating Trump] I want to make sure this is a long-term deal.’ ‘[imitating a world leader] Would infinity suit you? We could — we could also stipulate no take-backs. And while we rarely do this, we are prepared to pinkie-swear.’” — SETH MEYERS


“According to a new report, the deal that President Trump negotiated yesterday with NATO involves Denmark giving the U.S. sovereignty over small pockets of Greenland to build military bases. So, basically, the deal we already had. I’m so glad this guy isn’t my real estate broker: ‘Hey, so I think I can get you the house for the asking price.’” — SETH MEYERS

“So I think I know what happened here — Trump thought people wanted to know more about Epstein Island, so he tried to distract them with a bigger island. ‘[imitating Trump] You were thinking too small. Go for the big ones, America. Take your pick. You could have Greenland, Fiji, Madagascar. A lot of bad stuff happening on Madagascar.’” — SETH MEYERS

“You hear that, everybody? The problem that we never had until he created it is finally solved!” — STEPHEN COLBERT

“Just like the wall Mexico was going to pay for and the caravans that were coming, and they’re eating the dogs and cats. I’m telling you, after next week, we will never hear about Greenland again. What a bluffoon!” — JIMMY KIMMEL

The Punchiest Punchlines (Board of Peace Edition)
“Today in Switzerland, President Trump officially launched his new group to solve international conflicts called the Board of Peace. Yep. Of course, Trump wasted no time giving himself the inaugural Board of Peace Prize. He was like, ‘[imitating Trump] I can’t believe it. I can’t wait to win again next week.’” — JIMMY FALLON

“During a signing ceremony today for his Gaza Board of Peace, President Trump said, ‘We have peace in the Middle East, and no one thought that was possible.’ Yeah. Or even actually happening.’” — SETH MEYERS

“What an honor to be named chairman of your own board. Almost no Western democracies signed up to be part of this, but the very sketchy leaders of Saudi Arabia, Qatar and Hungary did immediately, and he invited Putin to be on the Board of Peace in his downtime, when he isn’t bombing Ukraine. What a group this is. They might as well call it the ‘Legion of Doom.’”— JIMMY KIMMEL

“Trump also invited the pope to join the Board of Peace. That’s right. The Vatican said the pope received the offer, but it is ‘something that requires a bit of time for consideration before giving a response,’ which is a polite way of saying they’re waiting for the pope to stop laughing. I mean, the white smoke coming out of the Vatican was the pope ripping a bong hit after getting this letter from Trump. I mean, seriously — there is a better chance the pope joins Tinder this year than the Board of Peace.” — JIMMY KIMMEL


Skip to contentSkip to site indexSection Navigation
Search
Art & Design
Log in
You have been granted access, use your keyboard to continue reading.
Artist Sues Over Venice Biennale Snub in Dispute Over Gaza-Focused Work
A panel recommended that Gabrielle Goliath represent South Africa at the event. But the culture minister rejected its suggestion.


Listen to this article · 7:49 min Learn more
Share full article


Two people wearing black tops and pants look into the camera while standing beside each other against a black backdrop.
The artist Gabrielle Goliath, right, and the curator Ingrid Masondo want to represent South Africa at the 2026 Venice Biennale, but the country’s culture minister considers their planned exhibition inappropriate.Credit...Zunis
Alex Marshall
By Alex Marshall
Reporting from London

Jan. 23, 2026
A South African artist is suing her country’s culture minister to demand that she can represent her country at this year’s Venice Biennale with a work paying tribute to a dead Palestinian poet — the latest development in a furor that is jeopardizing South Africa’s participation in the major international art exhibition.

The lawsuit, filed on Thursday in Pretoria, accuses Gayton McKenzie, the minister, of acting unlawfully and unconstitutionally by ignoring the recommendation of an independent panel that Gabrielle Goliath, 42, should be South Africa’s representative at the prestigious event.

The dispute underscores how the war in Gaza continues to cast a shadow over major culture events, even months after Israel and Hamas agreed on a cease-fire.

Goliath’s planned show, called “Elegy,” was to feature a video-based work in which singers paid tribute to a Palestinian poet killed in an Israeli airstrike.

Advertisement

SKIP ADVERTISEMENT
Although South Africa’s government has accused Israel of committing genocide in the war in Gaza, McKenzie said in a letter in December, published in the lawsuit, that “it would not be wise nor defensible” for him to support an artwork that comments on events in the Middle East when South Africa is facing its own “unjustified accusations of genocide.” President Trump has repeatedly asserted that white farmers in South Africa are victims of “a genocide.”

A spokeswoman for the culture minister declined to comment on the lawsuit on Thursday, but McKenzie said in a news release this month that he had the right to ignore the selection committee’s recommendation. “We shall give access at the Biennale to artists who promote our country,” he said. “That is my position and it is not something I will be bullied or shamed about.”

Image
A person dressed in all black stands, arms outstretched, on a dais in front of a black backdrop.
“Elegy — for a poet,” by Gabrielle Goliath, 2026.Credit...Zunis
During the event, which runs from May 9 to Nov. 22, countries host exhibitions in national pavilions, alongside a main group show featuring artworks chosen by an independent curator.

South Africa first presented a pavilion in 1950, and in recent decades has regularly sent artists to Venice to represent the country. Some of them have attracted international acclaim: In 2017, critics praised Candice Breitz’s “Love Story,” a film in which Alec Baldwin and Julianne Moore read out refugees’ stories.

Goliath, whose work was featured in the main exhibition for the Biennale’s last edition, is a video and performance artist. Other international presentations of her work include an ongoing exhibition at MoMA PS1, the contemporary art museum in New York.

In the lawsuit, Goliath says she has staged “Elegy” in various forms for more than a decade. In the work, female singers step onto a dais and hold a sung note for as long as possible. A curatorial statement for the exhibition, included in the lawsuit, says the work pays tribute to women and gay and trans people who have died by violent means.

In Venice, the work was to feature three sections: one paying tribute to a South African teenager who was murdered in 2014; a second mourning two Namibian women killed by German colonial forces in the early 20th century; and a third section dedicated to the Palestinian poet.

Since deciding Goliath’s “Elegy” was inappropriate for Venice, the culture ministry has tried to find an alternative artist. On Tuesday, the Art Newspaper reported that a 30-member collective known as Beyond the Frames was in discussion with the ministry about staging a show called “Shameless Rebellions: A South African Chorus” in the country’s pavilion.

Image
A man wearing a blue suit jacket and red tie stands among several other people.
Gayton Mckenzie, South Africa’s culture minister, said he did not want a work that comments on events in the Middle East to represent the country at the Venice Biennale.Credit...Halden Krog/EPA, via Shutterstock
Beyond the Frame’s Facebook page says the group holds weekly life drawing classes in Cape Town “celebrating the beauty of the human form.” Hannes Koekemoer, a spokesman for the collective, declined to comment on the negotiations, citing Goliath’s legal action.

Under the Biennale’s rules, countries were required to submit details of their national pavilions by Jan. 10. But Cristiana Costanzo, a spokeswoman for the event, said in an email that deadlines were “applied with the greatest flexibility” to ensure wide participation.

In the lawsuit, Goliath asks South Africa’s High Court to rule by early February so that she would still have time to take her show to Venice.

The furor began in early December, when Art Periodic, a nonprofit that was running South Africa’s pavilion selection process, informed Goliath that she had been chosen for Venice. Art Periodic declined an interview request for this article.

On Dec. 22, according to the legal documents, McKenzie wrote to Art Periodic to say he had learned about the artwork it had selected and was concerned that it “centers on the subject of Palestine.”

Less than two weeks later, on Jan. 2, the minister wrote to Art Periodic to say that negotiations over the pavilion had “reached an impasse” and that he was terminating the ministry’s agreement with Art Periodic to run the show. The minister said in the letter, which is included in the legal filings, that he would instead use the pavilion to showcase “a positive message that will help to repudiate the lies and misinformation that South Africa is a genocidal country.”

The decision caused a storm in South Africa’s art world, and on Jan. 10 McKenzie said in a news release that his concerns stemmed from learning that a “foreign power” had offered to buy the art from the pavilion. He said he feared that South Africa’s pavilion could be used as a proxy “to endorse a geopolitical message about the actions of Israel in Gaza.”

Goliath says in her lawsuit that this refers to Qatar Museums contacting Art Periodic to express interest in helping finance the pavilion or buying its contents, but that the offer had come to nothing.

Annchen Bronkowski, a University of Cape Town researcher who has written a history of South Africa’s participation in the Biennale, said in an interview that the minister’s reasons for not endorsing Goliath’s show seemed “to contradict the South African government’s own stance on Israel.”

But Bronkowski said that South African lawmakers had long appeared to have “misunderstood” the Venice Biennale’s purpose. Politicians appeared to think the pavilion should “promote South Africa and say, ‘We’re a strong democracy, we have a vibrant economy,’” she said, when the artists wanted to use it to “talk about much more complex social and political issues.”

South Africa is not the only country to vacillate over sending artists whose work touches on events in the Middle East to the Biennale. Last year, Creative Australia chose Khaled Sabsabi, a Lebanese-Australian artist, to represent Australia at this year’s even, only to drop him five days later because of an uproar over an artwork he made many years ago that featured a former leader of Hezbollah, the Lebanon-based militant group that violently opposes Israel. A few months later, Creative Australia reversed its decision again and said Sabsabi would go to Venice after all.

The conflict in Gaza could also rear its head in Venice in May, with some pro-Palestinian activists and artists threatening to protest Israel’s participation in the event.

In South Africa’s case, it is unclear whether the culture ministry will find anyone willing to replace Goliath given the legal action. “I would be surprised if they do,” Bronkowski said. “The South African art world is so small.”

Regardless of whether she gets to Venice, Goliath’s studio said in an emailed statement that she would finish the latest iteration of “Elegy,” and that this week she was filming the tribute to the Palestinian poet with 16 female opera singers.

Skip to contentSkip to site indexSection Navigation
Search
Log in
What to Read

Find Your Next Book
Fantasy
Science Fiction
Thrillers
Romance
You have a preview view of this article while we are checking your access. When we have confirmed access, the full article content will load.
Immersive Historical Fiction Full of Rule Breakers and Rebels
The author Janie Chang recommends novels about people who push back against the expectations of their time.

Share full article

4
The illustration shows portions of eight book covers, and one black-and-white author photo, on a light mustard background.
Credit...The New York Times
By Janie Chang
Janie Chang is a best-selling author of historical fiction, including “Three Souls,” “Dragon Springs Road,” “The Library of Legends” and “The Porcelain Moon,” and the co-author, with Kate Quinn, of “The Phoenix Crown.” Her new novel, “The Fourth Princess,” publishes in February.

Jan. 23, 2026
When fans of historical fiction open a book, they want to plunge into the past. Guided by descriptions of clothing, food, architecture and technology, they enter a time and place vastly different from their own. But there’s another, less tangible type of information a reader needs in order to truly empathize with a character. To understand the decisions he or she makes, the reader must have a firm grasp of the culture, social norms and politics of the novel’s time: 17th-century feminism, for example, is very different from what we call feminism in the 21st century.

It can be difficult for the author to convey these mores without sounding like a textbook — a guaranteed way to lose a reader. But one effective method is to put characters in conflict with the accepted norms — social, religious, political — of the day. The reader learns of boundaries crossed, or reluctantly sustained, through the reactions of the book’s characters, which can range from fear and disgust to admiration or acceptance.
