THERE WAS A HAND IN the darkness, and it held a knife.
The knife had a handle of polished black bone, and a blade finer and sharper than any razor. If it
sliced you, you might not even know you had been cut, not immediately.
The knife had done almost everything it was brought to that house to do, and both the
blade and the handle were wet.
The street door was still open, just a little, where the knife and the man who held it had
slipped in, and wisps of nighttime mist slithered and twined into the house through the open
door.
The Graveyard Book Neil Gaimon
6
The man Jack paused on the landing. With his left hand he pulled a large white
handkerchief from the pocket of his black coat, and with it he wiped off the knife and his gloved
right hand which had been holding it; then he put the handkerchief away. The hunt was almost
over. He had left the woman in her bed, the man on the bedroom floor, the older child in her
brightly colored bedroom, surrounded by toys and half-finished models. That only left the little
one, a baby barely a toddler, to take care of. One more and his task would be done.
He flexed his fingers. The man Jack was, above all things, a professional, or so he told
himself, and he would not allow himself to smile until the job was completed.
His hair was dark and his eyes were dark and he wore black leather gloves of the thinnest
lambskin.
The toddler’s room was at the very top of the house. The man Jack walked up the stairs,
his feet silent on the carpeting. Then he pushed open the attic door, and he walked in. His shoes
were black leather, and they were polished to such a shine that they looked like dark mirrors: you
could see the moon reflected in them, tiny and half full.
The real moon shone through the casement window. Its light was not bright, and it was
diffused by the mist, but the man Jack would not need much light. The moonlight was enough. It
would do.
He could make out the shape of the child in the crib, head and limbs and torso.
The Graveyard Book Neil Gaimon
7
The crib had high, slatted sides to prevent the child from getting out. Jack leaned over,
raised his right hand, the one holding the knife, and he aimed for the chest…
…and then he lowered his hand. The shape in the crib was a teddy bear. There was no
child.
The man Jack’s eyes were accustomed to the dim moonlight, so he had no desire to turn on
an electric light. And light was not that important, after all. He had other skills.
The man Jack sniffed the air. He ignored the scents that had come into the room with him,
dismissed the scents that he could safely ignore, honed in on the smell of the thing he had come
to find. He could smell the child: a milky smell, like chocolate chip cookies, and the sour tang of
a wet, disposable, nighttime diaper. He could smell the baby shampoo in its hair, and something
small and rubbery—a toy, he thought, and then, no, something to suck—that the child had been
carrying.
The child had been here. It was here no longer. The man Jack followed his nose down the
stairs through the middle of the tall, thin house. He inspected the bathroom, the kitchen, the
airing cupboard, and, finally, the downstairs hall, in which there was nothing to be seen but the
family’s bicycles, a pile of empty shopping bags, a fallen diaper, and the stray tendrils of fog that
had insinuated themselves into the hall from the open door to the street.
The man Jack made a small noise then, a grunt that contained in it both frustration and also
satisfaction. He slipped the knife into its sheath in the inside pocket of his long coat, and he
stepped out into the street. There was moonlight, and there were streetlights, but the fog stifled
everything, muted light and muffled sound and made the night shadowy and treacherous. He
looked down the hill towards the light of the closed shops, then up the street, where the last high
houses wound up the hill on their way to the darkness of the old graveyard.
The man Jack sniffed the air. Then, without hurrying, he began to walk up the hill.

Ever since the child had learned to walk he had been his mother’s and father’s despair and
delight, for there never was such a boy for wandering, for climbing up things, for getting into and
out of things. That night, he had been woken by the sound of something on the floor beneath him
falling with a crash. Awake, he soon became bored, and had begun looking for a way out of his
crib. It had high sides, like the walls of his playpen downstairs, but he was convinced that he
could scale it. All he needed was a step…
He pulled his large, golden teddy bear into the corner of the crib, then, holding the railing
in his tiny hands, he put his foot onto the bear’s lap, the other foot up on the bear’s head, and he
pulled himself up into a standing position, and then he half-climbed, half-toppled over the railing
and out of the crib.
He landed with a muffled thump on a small mound of furry, fuzzy toys, some of them
presents from relations from his first birthday, not six months gone, some of them inherited from
his older sister. He was surprised when he hit the floor, but he did not cry out: if you cried they
came and put you back in your crib.
He crawled out of the room.
Stairs that went up were tricky things, and he had not yet entirely mastered them. Stairs
that went down however, he had discovered, were fairly simple. He did them sitting down,
bumping from step to step on his well-padded bottom.
He sucked on his nummer, the rubber pacifier his mother had just begun to tell him that he
was getting too old for.
The Graveyard Book Neil Gaimon
8
His diaper had worked itself loose on his journey on his bottom down the stairs, and when
he reached the last step, when he reached the little hall and stood up, the diaper fell off. He
stepped out of it. He was only wearing a child’s nightshirt. The stairs that led back up to his
room and his family were steep, but the door to the street was open and inviting….
The child stepped out of the house a little hesitantly. The fog wreathed around him like a
long-lost friend. And then, uncertainly at first, then with increasing speed and confidence, the
boy tottered up the hill.

The fog was thinner as you approached the top of the hill. The half-moon shone, not as bright as
day, not by any means, but enough to see the graveyard, enough for that.
Look.
You could see the abandoned funeral chapel, iron doors padlocked, ivy on the sides of the
spire, a small tree growing out of the guttering at roof level.
You could see stones and tombs and vaults and memorial plaques. You could see the
occasional dash or scuttle of a rabbit or a vole or a weasel as it slipped out of the undergrowth
and across the path.
You would have seen these things, in the moonlight, if you had been there that night.
You might not have seen a pale, plump woman, who walked the path near the front gates,
and if you had seen her, with a second, more careful glance you would have realized that she was
only moonlight, mist, and shadow. The plump, pale woman was there, though. She walked the
path that led through a clutch of half-fallen tombstones towards the front gates.
The gates were locked. They were always locked at four in the afternoon in winter, at eight
at night in summer. Spike-topped iron railings ran around part of the cemetery, a high brick wall
around the rest of it. The bars of the gates were closely spaced: they would have stopped a grown
man from getting through, even stopped a ten-year-old child…
“Owens!” called the pale woman, in a voice that might have been the rustle of the wind
through the long grass. “Owens! Come and look at this!”
She crouched down and peered at something on the ground, as a patch of shadow moved
into the moonlight, revealing itself to be a grizzled man in his mid-forties. He looked down at his
wife, and then looked at what she was looking at, and he scratched his head.
“Mistress Owens?” he said, for he came from a more formal age than our own. “Is that
what I think it is?”
And at that moment the thing he was inspecting seemed to catch sight of Mrs. Owens, for
it opened its mouth, letting the rubber nipple it was sucking fall to the ground, and it reached out
a small, chubby fist, as if it were trying for all the world to hold on to Mrs. Owens’s pale finger.
“Strike me silly,” said Mr. Owens, “if that isn’t a baby.”
“Of course it’s a baby,” said his wife. “And the question is, what is to be done with it?”
“I daresay that is a question, Mistress Owens,” said her husband. “And yet, it is not our
question. For this here baby is unquestionably alive, and as such is nothing to do with us, and is
no part of our world.”
“Look at him smile!” said Mrs. Owens. “He has the sweetest of smiles,” and with one
insubstantial hand she stroked the child’s sparse blond hair. The little boy giggled with delight.
A chilly breeze blew across the graveyard, scattering the fog in the lower slopes of the
place (for the graveyard covered the whole of the top of the hill, and its paths wound up the hill
and down and back upon themselves). A rattling: someone at the main gate of the graveyard was
pulling and shaking it, rattling the old gates and the heavy padlock and chain that held them.
The Graveyard Book Neil Gaimon
9
“There now,” said Owens, “it’s the babe’s family, come to bring him back to the loving
bosom. Leave the little man be,” he added, because Mrs. Owens was putting her insubstantial
arms around the toddler, smoothing, stroking.
Mrs. Owens said, “He dun’t look like nobody’s family, that one.” The man in the dark coat
had given up on rattling the main gates and was now examining the smaller side gate. It, too, was
well-locked. There had been some vandalism in the graveyard the previous year, and the council
had Taken Steps.
“Come on, Mistress Owens. Leave it be. There’s a dear,” said Mr. Owens, when he saw a
ghost, and his mouth dropped open, and he found himself unable to think of anything to say.
You might think—and if you did, you would be right—that Mr. Owens should not have
taken on so at seeing a ghost, given that Mr. and Mrs. Owens were themselves dead and had
been for a few hundred years now, and given that the entirety of their social life, or very nearly,
was spent with those who were also dead. But there was a difference between the folk of the
graveyard and this: a raw, flickering, startling shape the grey color of television static, all panic
and naked emotion which flooded the Owenses as if it was their own. Three figures, two large,
one smaller, but only one of them was in focus, was more than an outline or a shimmer. And the
figure said, My baby! He is trying to harm my baby!
A clattering. The man outside was hauling a heavy metal garbage can across the alley to
the high brick wall that ran around that part of the graveyard.
“Protect my son!” said the ghost, and Mrs. Owens thought it was a woman. Of course, the
babe’s mother.
“What did he do to you?” asked Mrs. Owens, but she was not certain that the ghost could
hear her. Recently dead, poor love, she thought. It’s always easier to die gently, to wake in due
time in the place you were buried, to come to terms with your death and to get acquainted with
the other inhabitants. This creature was nothing but alarm and fear for her child, and her panic,
which felt to the Owenses like a low-pitched screaming, was now attracting attention, for other
pale figures were coming from all over the graveyard.
“Who are you?” Caius Pompeius asked the figure. His headstone was now only a
weathered lump of rock, but two thousand years earlier he had asked to be laid to rest on the
mound beside the marble shrine, rather than to have his body sent back to Rome, and he was one
of the most senior citizens of the graveyard. He took his responsibilities extremely seriously.
“Are you buried here?”
“Of course she’s not! Freshly dead by the look of her.” Mrs. Owens put an arm around the
woman-shape and spoke to it privately, in a low voice, calm and sensible.
There was a thump and a crash from the high wall beside the alley. The garbage can had
fallen. A man clambered up onto the top of the wall, a dark outline against the mist-smudged
streetlights. He paused for a moment, then climbed down the other side, holding on to the top of
the wall, legs dangling, then let himself fall the last few feet, down into the graveyard.
“But my dear,” Mrs. Owens said to the shape, now all that was left of the three shapes that
had appeared in the graveyard. “He’s living. We’re not. Can you imagine…”
The child was looking up at them, puzzled. It reached for one of them, then the other,
finding nothing but air. The woman-shape was fading fast.
“Yes,” said Mrs. Owens, in response to something that no one else had heard. “If we can,
then we will.” Then she turned to the man beside her. “And you, Owens? Will you be a father to
this little lad?”
“Will I what?” said Owens, his brow crinkling.
The Graveyard Book Neil Gaimon
10
“We never had a child,” said his wife. “And his mother wants us to protect him. Will you
say yes?”
The man in the black coat had tripped in the tangle of ivy and half-broken headstones.
Now he got to his feet and walked forward more carefully, startling an owl which rose on silent
wings. He could see the baby and there was triumph in his eyes.
Owens knew what his wife was thinking when she used that tone of voice. They had not,
in life and in death, been married for over two hundred and fifty years for nothing. “Are you
certain?” he asked. “Are you sure?”
“Sure as I ever have been of anything,” said Mrs. Owens.
“Then yes. If you’ll be its mother, I’ll be its father.”
“Did you hear that?” Mrs. Owens asked the flickering shape in the graveyard, now little
more than an outline, like distant summer lightning in the shape of a woman. It said something to
her that no one else could hear, and then it was gone.
“She’ll not come here again,” said Mr. Owens. “Next time she wakes it’ll be in her own
graveyard, or wherever it is she’s going.”
Mrs. Owens bent down to the baby and extended her arms. “Come now,” she said,
warmly. “Come to Mama.”
To the man Jack, walking through the graveyard towards them on a path, his knife already
in his hand, it seemed as if a swirl of mist had curled around the child, in the moonlight, and that
the boy was no longer there: just damp mist and moonlight and swaying grass.
He blinked and sniffed the air. Something had happened, but he had no idea what it was.
He growled in the back of his throat, like a beast of prey, angry and frustrated.
“Hullo?” called the man Jack, wondering if perhaps the child had stepped behind
something. His voice was dark and rough, and there was an odd edge to it, as if of surprise or
puzzlement at hearing himself speak.
The graveyard kept its secrets.
“Hello?” he called, again. He hoped to hear a baby cry or utter a half-word, or to hear it
move. He did not expect what he actually heard, a voice, silky smooth, saying,
“Can I help you?”
The man Jack was tall. This man was taller. The man Jack wore dark clothes. This man’s
clothes were darker. People who noticed the man Jack when he was about his business—and he
did not like to be noticed—were troubled, or made uncomfortable, or found themselves
unaccountably scared. The man Jack looked up at the stranger, and it was the man Jack who was
troubled.
“I was looking for someone,” said the man Jack, slipping his right hand back into his coat
pocket, so the knife was hidden, but there if he needed it.
“In a locked graveyard, at night?” said the stranger.
“It was just a baby,” said the man Jack. “I was just passing, when I heard a baby cry, and I
looked through the gates and I saw him. Well, what would anyone do?”
“I applaud your public-spiritedness,” said the stranger. “Yet if you managed to find this
child, how were you planning to get out of here with it? You can’t climb back over the wall
holding a baby.”
“I would have called until someone let me out,” said the man Jack.
A heavy jingling of keys. “Well, that would have been me, then,” said the stranger. “I
would have had to let you out.” He selected one large key from the key ring, said “Follow me.”
The Graveyard Book Neil Gaimon
11
The man Jack walked behind the stranger. He took his knife from his pocket. “Are you the
caretaker, then?”
“Am I? Certainly, in a manner of speaking,” said the stranger. They were walking towards
the gates and, the man Jack was certain, away from the baby. But the caretaker had the keys. A
knife in the dark, that was all it would take, and then he could search for the child all through the
night, if he needed to.
He raised the knife.
“If there was a baby,” said the stranger, without looking back, “it wouldn’t have been here
in the graveyard. Perhaps you were mistaken. It’s unlikely that a child would have come in here,
after all. Much more likely that you heard a nightbird, and saw a cat, perhaps, or a fox. They
declared this place an official nature reserve, you know, thirty years ago, around the time of the
last funeral. Now think carefully, and tell me you are certain that it was a child that you saw.”
The man Jack thought.
The stranger unlocked the side gate. “A fox,” he said. “They make the most uncommon
noises, not unlike a person crying. No, your visit to this graveyard was a mis-step, sir.
Somewhere the child you seek awaits you, but he is not here.” And he let the thought sit there, in
the man Jack’s head for a moment, before he opened the gate with a flourish. “Delighted to have
made your acquaintance,” he said. “And I trust that you will find everything you need out there.”
The man Jack stood outside the gates to the graveyard. The stranger stood inside the gate,
and he locked it again, and put the key away.
“Where are you going?” asked the man Jack.
“There are other gates than this,” said the stranger. “My car is on the other side of the hill.
Don’t mind me. You don’t even have to remember this conversation.”
“No,” said the man Jack, agreeably. “I don’t.” He remembered wandering up the hill, that
what he had thought to be a child had turned out to be a fox, that a helpful caretaker had escorted
him back out to the street. He slipped his knife into its inner sheath. “Well,” he said. “Good
night.”
“A good night to you,” said the stranger whom Jack had taken for a caretaker.
The man Jack set off down the hill, in pursuit of the infant.
From the shadows, the stranger watched Jack until he was out of sight. Then he moved
through the night, up and up, to the flat place below the brow of the hill, a place dominated by an
obelisk and a flat stone set into the ground dedicated to the memory of Josiah Worthington, local
brewer, politician and later baronet, who had, almost three hundred years before, bought the old
cemetery and the land around it, and given it to the city in perpetuity. He had reserved for
himself the best location on the hill—a natural amphitheater, with a view of the whole city and
beyond—and had insured that the graveyard endured as a graveyard, for which the inhabitants of
the graveyard were grateful, although never quite as grateful as Josiah Worthington, Bart., felt
they should have been.
There were, all told, some ten thousand souls in the graveyard, but most of them slept
deep, or took no interest in the night-to-night affairs of the place, and there were less than three
hundred of them up there, in the amphitheater, in the moonlight.
The stranger reached them as silently as the fog itself, and he watched the proceedings
unfold, from the shadows, and he said nothing.
Josiah Worthington was speaking. He said, “My dear madam. Your obduracy is quite,
is…well, can’t you see how ridiculous this is?”
“No,” said Mrs. Owens. “I can’t.”
The Graveyard Book Neil Gaimon
12
She was sitting, cross-legged, on the ground, and the living child was sleeping in her lap.
She cradled its head with her pale hands.
“What Mistress Owens is trying to say, sir, begging your honor’s pardon,” said Mr.
Owens, standing beside her, “is that she dun’t see it that way. She sees it as doing her duty.”
Mr. Owens had seen Josiah Worthington in the flesh back when they were both alive, had
in fact made several pieces of fine furniture for the Worthington manor house, out near
Inglesham, and was still in awe of him.
“Her duty?” Josiah Worthington, Bart., shook his head, as if to dislodge a strand of
cobweb. “Your duty, ma’am, is to the graveyard, and to the commonality of those who form this
population of discarnate spirits, revenants and suchlike wights, and your duty thus is to return the
creature as soon as possible to its natural home—which is not here.”
“His mama gave the boy to me,” said Mrs. Owens, as if that was all that needed to be said.
“My dear woman…”
“I am not your dear woman,” said Mrs. Owens, getting to her feet. “Truth to tell, I don’t
even see why I am even here, talking to you fiddle-pated old dunderheads, when this lad is going
to wake up hungry soon enough—and where am I going to find food for him in this graveyard, I
should like to know?”
“Which,” said Caius Pompeius, stiffly, “is precisely the point. What will you feed him?
How can you care for him?”
Mrs. Owens’s eyes burned. “I can look after him,” she said, “as well as his own mama.
She already gave him to me. Look: I’m holding him, aren’t I? I’m touching him.”
“Now, see reason, Betsy,” said Mother Slaughter, a tiny old thing, in the huge bonnet and
cape that she had worn in life and been buried wearing. “Where would he live?”
“Here,” said Mrs. Owens. “We could give him the Freedom of the Graveyard.”
Mother Slaughter’s mouth became a tiny O. “But,” she said. Then she said, “But I never.”
“Well, why not? It en’t the first time we’d’ve given the Freedom of the Graveyard to an
outsider.”
“That is true,” said Caius Pompeius. “But he wasn’t alive.”
And with that, the stranger realized that he was being drawn, like it or not, into the
conversation and, reluctantly, he stepped out of the shadows, detaching from them like a patch of
darkness. “No,” he agreed. “I am not. But I take Mrs. Owens’s point.”
Josiah Worthington said, “You do, Silas?”
“I do. For good or for evil—and I firmly believe that it is for good—Mrs. Owens and her
husband have taken this child under their protection. It is going to take more than just a couple of
good-hearted souls to raise this child. It will,” said Silas, “take a graveyard.”
“And what of food, and the rest of it?”
“I can leave the graveyard and return. I can bring him food,” said Silas.
“That’s all very well you saying that,” said Mother Slaughter. “But you comes and you
goes and nobody keeps track of you. If you went off for a week, the boy could die.”
“You are a wise woman,” said Silas. “I see why they speak so highly of you.” He couldn’t
push the minds of the dead as he could the living, but he could use all the tools of flattery and
persuasion he possessed, for the dead are not immune to either. Then he came to a decision.
“Very well. If Mr. and Mrs. Owens will be his parents, I shall be his guardian. I shall remain
here, and if I need to leave I shall ensure that someone takes my place, bringing the child food
and looking after him. We can use the crypt of the chapel,” he added.
The Graveyard Book Neil Gaimon
13
“But,” expostulated Josiah Worthington. “But. A human child. A living child. I mean. I
mean, I mean. This is a graveyard, not a nursery, blast it.”
“Exactly,” said Silas, nodding. “A very good point, Sir Josiah. I couldn’t have put it better
myself. And for that reason, if for no other, it is vital that the child be raised with as little
disruption as possible to the, if you’ll forgive the expression, the life of the graveyard.” With that
he strolled over to Mrs. Owens, and he looked down at the infant asleep in her arms. He raised an
eyebrow. “Does he have a name, Mrs. Owens?”
“Not that his mother told me,” she said.
“Well, then,” said Silas. “His old name won’t be of much use to him now, anyway. There
are those out there who mean him harm. Suppose we pick a name for him, eh?”
Caius Pompeius stepped over and eyed the child. “He looks a little like my proconsul,
Marcus. We could call him Marcus.”
Josiah Worthington said, “He looks more like my head gardener, Stebbins. Not that I’m
suggesting Stebbins as a name. The man drank like a fish.”
“He looks like my nephew Harry,” said Mother Slaughter, and it seemed then as if the
whole graveyard was about to join in, each inhabitant offering his or her own comparisons
between the infant and someone long forgotten, when Mrs. Owens broke in.
“He looks like nobody but himself,” said Mrs. Owens, firmly. “He looks like nobody.”
“Then Nobody it is,” said Silas. “Nobody Owens.”
It was then that, as if responding to the name, the child opened its eyes wide in
wakefulness. It stared around it, taking in the faces of the dead, and the mist, and the moon. Then
it looked at Silas. Its gaze did not flinch. It looked grave.
“And what kind of a name is Nobody?” asked Mother Slaughter, scandalized.
“His name. And a good name,” Silas told her. “It will help to keep him safe.”
“I don’t want trouble,” said Josiah Worthington. The infant looked up at him and then,
hungry or tired or simply missing his home, his family, his world, he screwed up his tiny face
and began to cry.
“Leave us,” said Caius Pompeius to Mrs. Owens. “We will discuss this further without
you.”

Mrs. Owens waited outside the funeral chapel. It had been decreed over forty years before that
the building, in appearance a small church with a spire, was a listed building of historical
interest. The town council had decided that it would cost too much to renovate it, a little chapel
in an overgrown graveyard that had already become unfashionable, so they had padlocked it, and
waited for it to fall down. Ivy covered it, but it was solidly built, and it would not fall down this
century.
The child had fallen asleep in Mrs. Owens’s arms. She rocked it gently, sang to it an old
song, one her mother had sung to her when she was a baby herself, back in the days when men
had first started to wear powdered wigs. The song went,
Sleep my little babby-oh
Sleep until you waken
When you’re grown you’ll see the world
If I’m not mistaken.
Kiss a lover,
Dance a measure,
Find your name
The Graveyard Book Neil Gaimon
14
and buried treasure…
And Mrs. Owens sang all that before she discovered that she had forgotten how the song
ended. She had a feeling that the final line was something in the way of “and some hairy bacon,”
but that might have been another song altogether, so she stopped and instead she sang him the
one about the Man in the Moon who came down too soon, and after that she sang, in her warm
country voice, a more recent song about a lad who put in his thumb and pulled out a plum, and
she had just started a long ballad about a young country gentleman whose girlfriend had, for no
particular reason, poisoned him with a dish of spotted eels, when Silas came around the side of
the chapel, carrying a cardboard box.
“Here we go, Mistress Owens,” he said. “Lots of good things for a growing boy. We can
keep it in the crypt, eh?”
The padlock fell off in his hand and he pulled open the iron door. Mrs. Owens walked
inside, looking dubiously at the shelves, and at the old wooden pews tipped up against a wall.
There were mildewed boxes of old parish records in one corner, and an open door that revealed a
Victorian flush toilet and a basin, with only a cold tap, in the other.
The infant opened his eyes and stared.
“We can put the food here,” said Silas. “It’s cool, and the food will keep longer.” He
reached into the box, pulled out a banana.
“And what would that be when it was at home?” asked Mrs. Owens, eyeing the yellow and
brown object suspiciously.
“It’s a banana. A fruit, from the tropics. I believe you peel off the outer covering,” said
Silas, “like so.”
The child—Nobody—wriggled in Mrs. Owens’s arms, and she let it down to the
flagstones. It toddled rapidly to Silas, grasped his trouser-leg and held on.
Silas passed it the banana.
Mrs. Owens watched the boy eat. “Ba-na-na,” she said, dubiously. “Never heard of them.
Never. What’s it taste like?”
“I’ve absolutely no idea,” said Silas, who consumed only one food, and it was not
bananas. “You could make up a bed in here for the boy, you know.”
“I’ll do no such thing, with Owens and me having a lovely little tomb over by the daffodil
patch. Plenty of room in there for a little one. Anyway,” she added, concerned that Silas might
think she was rejecting his hospitality, “I wouldn’t want the lad disturbing you.”
“He wouldn’t.”
The boy was done with his banana. What he had not eaten was now smeared over himself.
He beamed, messy and apple-cheeked.
“Narna,” he said, happily.
“What a clever little thing he is,” said Mrs. Owens. “And such a mess he’s made! Why,
attend, you little wriggler…” and she picked the lumps of banana from his clothes and his hair.
And then, “What do you think they’ll decide?”
“I don’t know.”
“I can’t give him up. Not after what I promised his mama.”
“Although I have been a great many things in my time,” said Silas, “I have never been a
mother. And I do not plan to begin now. But I can leave this place…”
Mrs. Owens said simply, “I cannot. My bones are here. And so are Owens’s. I’m never
leaving.”
The Graveyard Book Neil Gaimon
15
“It must be good,” said Silas, “to have somewhere that you belong. Somewhere that’s
home.” There was nothing wistful in the way he said this. His voice was drier than deserts, and
he said it as if he were simply stating something unarguable. Mrs. Owens did not argue.
“Do you think we will have long to wait?”
“Not long,” said Silas, but he was wrong about that.
Up in the amphitheater on the side of the hill, the debate continued. That it was the
Owenses who had got involved in this nonsense, rather than some flibbertigibbet johnny-comelatelies, counted for a lot, for the Owenses were respectable and respected. That Silas had
volunteered to be the boy’s guardian had weight—Silas was regarded with a certain wary awe by
the graveyard folk, existing as he did on the borderland between their world and the world they
had left. But still, but still…
A graveyard is not normally a democracy, and yet death is the great democracy, and each
of the dead had a voice, and an opinion as to whether the living child should be allowed to stay,
and they were each determined to be heard, that night.
It was late autumn when the daybreak was long in coming. Although the sky was still
dark, cars could now be heard starting up further down the hill, and as the living folk began to
drive to work through the misty night-black morning, the graveyard folk talked about the child
that had come to them, and what was to be done. Three hundred voices. Three hundred opinions.
Nehemiah Trot, the poet, from the tumbled northwestern side of the graveyard, had begun to
declaim his thoughts on the matter, although what they were no person listening could have said,
when something happened; something to silence each opinionated mouth, something
unprecedented in the history of that graveyard.
A huge white horse, of the kind that the people who know horses would call a “grey,”
came ambling up the side of the hill. The pounding of its hooves could be heard before it was
seen, along with the crashing it made as it pushed through the little bushes and thickets, through
the brambles and the ivy and the gorse that had grown up on the side of the hill. The size of a
Shire horse it was, a full nineteen hands or more. It was a horse that could have carried a knight
in full armor into combat, but all it carried on its naked back was a woman, clothed from head to
foot in grey. Her long skirt and her shawl might have been spun out of old cobwebs.
Her face was serene, and peaceful.
They knew her, the graveyard folk, for each of us encounters the Lady on the Grey at the
end of our days, and there is no forgetting her.
The horse paused beside the obelisk. In the east the sky was lightening gently, a pearlish,
pre-dawn luminescence that made the people of the graveyard uncomfortable and made them
think about returning to their comfortable homes. Even so, not a one of them moved. They were
watching the Lady on the Grey, each of them half-excited, half-scared. The dead are not
superstitious, not as a rule, but they watched her as a Roman Augur might have watched the
sacred crows circle, seeking wisdom, seeking a clue.
And she spoke to them.
In a voice like the chiming of a hundred tiny silver bells she said only, “The dead should
have charity.” And she smiled.
The horse, which had been contentedly ripping up and masticating a clump of thick grass,
stopped then. The lady touched the horse’s neck, and it turned. It took several huge, clattering
steps, then it was off the side of the hill and cantering across the sky. Its thunderous hooves
became an early rumble of distant thunder, and in moments it was lost to sight.
The Graveyard Book Neil Gaimon
16
That, at least, was what the folk of the graveyard who had been on the hillside that night
claimed had happened.
The debate was over and ended, and, without so much as a show of hands, had been
decided. The child called Nobody Owens would be given the Freedom of the Graveyard.
Mother Slaughter and Josiah Worthington, Bart., accompanied Mr. Owens to the crypt of
the old chapel, and they told Mrs. Owens the news.
She seemed unsurprised by the miracle. “That’s right,” she said. “Some of them dun’t
have a ha’porth of sense in their heads. But she does. Of course she does.”

Before the sun rose on a thundering grey morning the child was fast asleep in the Owenses’ fine
little tomb (for Master Owens had died the prosperous head of the local cabinetmaker’s guild,
and the cabinetmakers had wanted to ensure that he was properly honored).
Silas went out for one final journey before the sunrise. He found the tall house on the side
of the hill, and he examined the three bodies he found there, and he studied the pattern of the
knife-wounds. When he was satisfied he stepped out into the morning’s dark, his head churning
with unpleasant possibilities, and he returned to the graveyard, to the chapel spire where he slept
and waited out the days.
In the little town at the bottom of the hill the man Jack was getting increasingly angry. The
night had been one that he had been looking forward to for so long, the culmination of months—
of years—of work. And the business of the evening had started so promisingly—three people
down before any of them had even had a chance to cry out. And then…
Then it had all gone so maddeningly wrong. Why on earth had he gone up the hill when
the child had so obviously gone down the hill? By the time he had reached the bottom of the hill,
the trail had gone cold. Someone must have found the child, taken it in, hidden it. There was no
other explanation.
A crack of thunder rang out, loud and sudden as a gunshot, and the rain began in earnest.
The man Jack was methodical, and he began to plan his next move—the calls he would need to
pay on certain of the townsfolk, people who would be his eyes and ears in the town.
He did not need to tell the Convocation he had failed.
Anyway, he told himself, edging under a shopfront as the morning rain came down like
tears, he had not failed. Not yet. Not for years to come. There was plenty of time. Time to tie up
this last piece of unfinished business. Time to cut the final thread.
It was not until the police sirens sounded and first a police car, then an ambulance, then an
unmarked police car with a siren blaring, sped past him on their way up the hill that, reluctantly,
the man Jack turned up the collar of his coat, put his head down, and walked off into the
morning. His knife was in his pocket, safe and dry inside its sheath, protected from the misery of
the elements.
The Graveyard Book Neil Gaimon
17
The Graveyard Book Neil Gaimon
18
CHAPTER TWO
The New Friend
BOD WAS A QUIET child with sober grey eyes and a mop of tousled, mouse-colored hair. He
was, for the most part, obedient. He learned how to talk, and, once he had learned, he would
pester the graveyard folk with questions. “Why amn’t I allowed out of the graveyard?” he would
ask, or “How do I do what he just did?” or “Who lives in here?” The adults would do their best
to answer his questions, but their answers were often vague, or confusing, or contradictory, and
then Bod would walk down to the old chapel and talk to Silas.
The Graveyard Book Neil Gaimon
19
He would be there waiting at sunset, just before Silas awakened.
His guardian could always be counted upon to explain matters clearly and lucidly and as
simply as Bod needed in order to understand.
“You aren’t allowed out of the graveyard—it’s aren’t, by the way, not amn’t, not these
days—because it’s only in the graveyard that we can keep you safe. This is where you live and
this is where those who love you can be found. Outside would not be safe for you. Not yet.”
“You go outside. You go outside every night.”
“I am infinitely older than you, lad. And I am safe wherever I am.”
“I’m safe there too.”
“I wish that that were true. But as long as you stay here, you are safe.”
Or,
“How could you do that? Some skills can be attained by education, and some by practice,
and some by time. Those skills will come if you study. Soon enough you will master Fading and
Sliding and Dreamwalking. But some skills cannot be mastered by the living, and for those you
must wait a little longer. Still, I do not doubt that you will acquire even those, in time.
“You were given the Freedom of the Graveyard, after all,” Silas would tell him. “So the
Graveyard is taking care of you. While you are here, you can see in the darkness. You can walk
some of the ways that the living should not travel. The eyes of the living will slip from you. I too
was given the Freedom of the Graveyard, although in my case it comes with nothing but the right
of abode.”
“I want to be like you,” said Bod, pushing out his lower lip.
“No,” said Silas, firmly. “You do not.”
Or,


